PUBLISHED IN IEEE TRANS. ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROC ESSING, VOL. 18, NO. 4, PP. 809–821, MAY 2010 1
A Modal-Based Real-Time Piano Synthesizer
Bal´ azs Bank, Stefano Zambon, and Federico Fontana, Member, IEEE
Abstract—This paper presents a real-time piano synthesizer
where both the transverse and longitudinal motion of the str ing
is modeled by modal synthesis, resulting in a coherent and hi ghly
parallel model structure. The paper applies recent develop ments
in piano modeling and focuses on the issues related to practi cal
implementation (e.g., numerical stability, aliasing, and efﬁciency).
A strong emphasis is given to modeling nonlinear string vi-
brations, and a new variation of earlier synthesis techniqu es is
proposed which is particularly well suited for modal synthe sis.
For soundboard modeling, the possibilities of using FFT-ba sed
fast convolution and parallel second-order ﬁlters are disc ussed.
Additionally, the paper describes the details of the softwa re
implementation and discusses the computational complexit y of
each model block. The piano model runs on current computer
hardware with full polyphony in real time.
Index Terms—physics-based sound synthesis, modal synthesis,
piano.
I. I NTRODUCTION
T
HE piano is a particularly important instrument for sound
synthesis applications because of many reasons. First, the
piano has a large prominence in western music, while it is
large, heavy and expensive. Thus, there is a great demand for
an electronic substitute for home or stage use. Second, because
the piano is a keyboard instrument, its control interface is
relatively simple, unlike that of the guitar or the violin. T hat
is, there is no physical obstacle on the control side to fulﬁl l
this demand.
Most of the current digital pianos are based on sample
playback. Because of the simple interface (the player contr ols
the key velocity only), a high level of realism can be achieve d.
The variation of the sound as a function of key velocity can be
taken into account by linear ﬁltering or by crossfading between
samples recorded at different dynamic levels. However, the
dynamic interactions of the different parts of the piano, li ke
the restrike of the same string or the coupling between the
strings, cannot be faithfully reproduced.
The remedy of the problems of sampling synthesis is the use
of physical modeling, where, instead of reproducing the sou nd
of the instrument, the entire sound production mechanism is
modeled. That is, a complete virtual instrument is running
on the computer or dedicated hardware. Because of the very
nature of physical modeling, the interaction of different p arts
Manuscript received April 01, 2009; revised December 03, 20 09. Current
version published April 14, 2010. This work was supported by the joint project
of Viscount International SpA and Verona University. The as sociate editor
coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication
was Prof. Julius Smith.
B. Bank was with the Department of Computer Science, Verona U niversity,
37134 Verona, Italy. He is now with the Department of Measure ment and
Information Systems, Budapest University of Technology an d Economics,
1117 Budapest, Hungary (e-mail: bank@mit.bme.hu).
S. Zambon and F. Fontana are with the Department of Computer S cience,
Verona University, 37134 Verona, Italy (e-mails: stefano. zambon@univr.it;
federico.fontana@univr.it).
(such as the coupling of strings) is automatically modeled.
Moreover, the user (player or sound designer) controls a
relatively small set of meaningful parameters similar to th ose
of real pianos, like hammer hardness, string mistuning, etc .
The ﬁrst step of physics-based sound synthesis is to un-
derstand how the instrument works, that is, the equations de -
scribing the main parts of the instrument have to be develope d
and the interactions of the different parts have to be reveal ed.
However, the resulting computational complexity of numer-
ically solving an instrument model that incorporates all th e
details we know about a speciﬁc instrument is usually too hig h
for real-time implementation. Therefore, some simpliﬁcat ions
have to be made. This is usually done by neglecting some
perceptually less relevant phenomena in such a way that this
should not lead to signiﬁcant audible differences compared
to the full model. Next, efﬁcient signal processing algorit hms
are developed for computing the solution of this simpliﬁed
physical model.
The ﬁrst physics-based instrument model was presented as
early as 1971 by Hiller and Ruiz [1], [2]. Interestingly, the
ﬁrst piano model has followed 16 years later, which was the
digital waveguide-based piano of Garnett [3]. In 1995, Smit h
and Van Duyne [4], [5] proposed a piano model based on
commuted synthesis. As part of a collaboration between the
University of Padova and Generalmusic S.p.A., Borin et al.
[6] presented the ﬁrst complete real-time piano model in 199 7.
Bank [7] introduced a similar physical model in 2000, with
slightly different implementation, and its real-time version was
implemented in 2002. A concise overview of these two models
and some additional results have been presented in [8]. In th e
recent years, several improvements were proposed by Bensa
and coworkers, concentrating on the modeling of coupled
piano strings and on a parametric excitation model [9], [10] ,
[11]. Bank has examined the generation of longitudinal motion
in piano strings and proposed various modeling methods
[12], [13]. Rauhala and their colleagues have concentrated
on improved parameter estimation techniques and efﬁcient,
parametric implementations [14], [15]. We have started the
implementation of our real-time modal-based piano synthe-
sizer in 2007 as a part of collaboration between Viscount
International and Verona University, and this forms the top ic
of the present paper.
Although physics-based piano synthesis has a more than two
decades tradition in academic research, it has been applied in
commercial products only very recently, due to its relative ly
high computational cost. A software piano, Pianoteq, was
introduced by Modartt in 2006 [16], and the ﬁrst digital pian o
employing physical modeling was presented by Roland in
2009 [17]. It is expected that physical modeling will be the
current trend in digital pianos.
In this paper we describe a complete piano synthesizer
PUBLISHED IN IEEE TRANS. ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROC ESSING, VOL. 18, NO. 4, PP. 809–821, MAY 2010 2
String
Bridge
Soundboard Hammer
0 hx L
x
(a)
(b)
Fig. 1. General structures; (a) schematic representation o f the instrument
with the coordinate system for string modeling; (b) basic mo del structure.
based on modal synthesis. Concerning each model block, the
chosen approach is brieﬂy compared to other possibilities,
and its advantages are discussed. A strong emphasis is given
to the connection of the different blocks and on practical
issues related to numerical stability, aliasing, and efﬁci ent
implementation. For modeling longitudinal vibrations, a n ew
variation of previous approaches is proposed which is parti c-
ularly well suited for modal synthesis. Finally, the real-t ime
software implementation is discussed, and the computation al
complexity of the different blocks is estimated.
II. M ODEL STRUCTURE
Since the physical modeling approach simulates the sound
production of the instrument, the blocks in the piano model
resemble the parts of a real piano, as displayed in Fig. 1. The
ﬁrst model block is the excitation, the hammer strike exciti ng
the string. The string determines the fundamental frequenc y
of the tone and its quasi-periodic output signal is ﬁltered
through a post-processing block, covering the radiation ef fects
of the soundboard. Figure 1(b) shows that the hammer–string
interaction is bi-directional, since the hammer force depe nds
on the string displacement. The string–soundboard couplin g is
also bidirectional in real instruments, because the soundb oard,
besides radiating the sound, provides a terminating impeda nce
to the string. However, since the impedance of the soundboar d
is around a thousand times larger than that of the string, the
only signiﬁcant effect of the string–soundboard coupling i s a
change in the modal frequencies and decay times of the string .
Therefore, it is customary to use a simpliﬁed modeling where
the “impedance effects” of the coupling, i.e., the variatio n in
the modal frequencies and decay times of the string, are take n
into account by changing the parameters of the string block,
and only the “radiation properties” are modeled in the radia tor
block.
Figure 1 displays only the main parts of the instrument and
the corresponding synthesis model—the blocks for modeling
secondary effects are omitted for clarity. The full piano mo del
is displayed in Fig. 2. The functions of the various blocks wi ll
be explained later in the corresponding sections.
III. M AIN STRING MODEL
In reality, the string vibrates in two transverse and one
longitudinal directions. First we consider the vibration o f the
Long. excitation force
Soundboard
modelHammer Main string model
Long. vibration
Secondary resonators
To the secondary
resonators of other stings
From the main string
model of other stings
Sound
Fig. 2. Detailed model structure.
main transverse polarization y(x, t ). The stiff and lossy string
equation is
µ ∂ 2y
∂t 2 = T0
∂ 2y
∂x 2 − ESκ 2 ∂ 4y
∂x 4 − 2Rµ ∂y
∂t + dy(x, t ), (1)
which is the ideal wave equation extended by terms describin g
the stiffness and losses of the string [18]. The tension of th e
string is denoted T0, and µ is the mass per unit length. The
stiffness of the string is characterized by ESκ 2, where E is
the Young’s modulus,S is the cross-section area of the string,
and κ is the radius of gyration. The internal losses of the string
and the losses due to the impedance effect of the soundboard
are approximated by the frictional resistance R. Note that in
real instruments, losses are frequency dependent. This eff ect
will be taken into account later in (3). External driving for ces
are included in the excitation force density dy(x, t ), which has
the dimension of force per unit length.
Equation (1) can be numerically solved in many ways; see
[19] for an overview of the methods used in sound synthesis
applications. We summarize only three commonly used ap-
proaches. The ﬁrst is ﬁnite difference modeling, which is based
on approximating the derivatives of the wave equation (1) by
differences, leading to a difference equation that can be ea sily
solved numerically. Finite difference piano models includ e
[20], [21], [22]. Finite-difference modeling is especiall y well
suited for modeling complex structures (such as the piano
soundboard), where a closed-form solution cannot be derive d.
However, for simple linear systems, such as the one-
dimensional wave equation (1), the closed-form solution is
known, and the computational complexity can be greatly
reduced if the continuous-time solution is discretized ins tead
of the wave equation itself. Digital waveguide modeling,
introduced by Smith [23], [24], discretizes the traveling w ave
solution of the ideal wave equation. The losses and dispersi on
of real strings are lumped to one speciﬁc ﬁlter in the model.
Thus, the full string model reduces to a delay line and a
relatively low order IIR ﬁlter in a feedback loop. Most of
the piano models intended for sound synthesis applications
[3], [6], [7], [10], [15] are based on the digital waveguide
technique due to its efﬁciency.
In modal synthesis, the modal solution of the wave equation
is discretized [25], [26]. Thus, the string is modeled by a se t
of second-order resonators, each implementing the respons e
of one particular mode. The modal approach has been already
used for the simulation of nonlinear vibrations in piano str ings
[12], [13]. This paper presents a complete piano model that i s
PUBLISHED IN IEEE TRANS. ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROC ESSING, VOL. 18, NO. 4, PP. 809–821, MAY 2010 3
based on modal synthesis.
The choice of the modeling method for the string has been
made after carefully considering the advantages and drawbacks
of digital waveguides and modal synthesis. The main differ-
ence of our piano model from the previous ones presented in
the literature is the ability to model nonlinear string vibrations.
Thus, the usual choice of digital waveguide modeling had to
be revised. It has been shown in [13] that precise modeling
is not possible with digital waveguides in their efﬁcient fo rm,
because the modal shapes of the string model become non-
orthogonal due to the lumped dispersion ﬁlter. Either the
dispersion ﬁlter has to be distributed, increasing the mode l
complexity signiﬁcantly, or, some less physical “tricks” h ave
to be used [13]. On the other hand, modeling the nonlinear
vibrations in piano strings is very straightforward with mo dal
synthesis, as will be shown in Sec. V.
While the computational complexity of our modal pi-
ano model is probably higher compared to earlier, digital-
waveguide based piano models that neglect nonlinear string
vibrations, it is still efﬁcient enough to consume only one
third of the resources of a today’s PC, which we ﬁnd an
acceptable compromise. This efﬁciency can be achieved in
spite of the relatively high number of required arithmetic
operations because modal synthesis results in a fully paral lel
structure and simple code that is easier to optimize (see Sec .
VIII for details). An additional advantage of modal synthesis is
greater ﬂexibility, since all the parameters of the partials can be
set independently. This leads to simpler parameter estimat ion
and the possibility of modifying the parameters in real-tim e.
A. Continuous-time equations
The modal solution of the string equation can be found in
various acoustics textbooks. Nevertheless, summarizing it here
is still instructive and helps understanding the different parts
of the model. The following derivation is a slightly modiﬁed
and more concise version of Chap. 2 in [13].
If the string is rigidly terminated at x = 0 and x = L
with hinged boundary conditions, as displayed in Fig. 1 (a),
the string shape y(x, t ) can be expressed by the Fourier-like
series
y(x, t ) =
∞∑
k=1
yk(t) sin
( kπx
L
)
x ∈ [0, L ] (2)
where yk(t) is the instantaneous amplitude of mode k.
The solution of (1) can be separated for the different modes
if (2) is substituted into (1), then multiplied by the modal shape
sin(kπx/L ) and integrated over x from 0 to L. The resulting
second-order differential equation governing the behavio r of
mode k is
d2yk
dt2 + a1,k
dyk
dt + a0,k yk = b0,k Fy,k (t), (3)
where
a1,k = 2 Rk (4a)
a0,k = T0
µ
( kπ
L
) 2
+ ESκ 2
µ
( kπ
L
) 4
(4b)
b0,k = 2
Lµ (4c)
Fy,k (t) =
∫ L
x=0
sin
( kπx
L
)
dy(x, t )dx. (4d)
In (3), Fy,k (t) is the excitation force of mode k, and it is
computed as the scalar product of the excitation force densi ty
and the modal shape (see (4d)).
Once the partial differential equation (1) is decoupled to
a set of ordinary differential equations (3), it is possible to
modify each of the parameters of (3). We take advantage of
this fact by using Rk instead of R in (4a) in order to model
frequency dependent losses, since now Rk can be different for
the various modes having different modal frequencies.
The solution of (3) for Fy,k (t) = δ (t) with zero initial
conditions is an exponentially decaying sine function give n
by
yδ,k (t) = Ake− t
τ k sin(2πf kt) (5a)
Ak = b0,k
2πf k
= 1
πLµf k
(5b)
τ k = 2
a1,k
= 1
Rk
(5c)
fk = 1
2π
√
a0,k −
a2
1,k
4 ≈ f0k
√
1 + Bk 2, (5d)
where Ak is the initial amplitude, τ k is the decay time, and
fk is the frequency of mode k. In (5d), f0 is the fundamental
frequency of the string and B is the inharmonicity coefﬁcient.
They are computed as
f0 = 1
2L
√
T0
µ = 1
2L ct and B = κ 2 ES
T0
( π
L
) 2
, (6)
where ct is the transverse propagation speed.
A practical choice for the loss term Rk is the second-order
function
Rk = 1
τ k
= b1 + b32πf k, (7)
which implements the same type of frequency dependent
losses as the ﬁnite-difference model of [20], [21], or the us ual
one-pole loss ﬁlter in digital waveguide modeling (see the
Appendix of [7]). Example values for the b1 and b3 coefﬁcients
can be found in [21]. Note that (7) is just the simplest choice ,
since Rk = 1 /τ k can be chosen arbitrarily for the various
modes, e.g., based on the analysis of real tones.
As (5) computes the impulse response of the system char-
acterized by (3), the response to the excitation force Fy,k (t)
is obtained by the time domain convolution
yk(t) = yδ,k (t) ∗ Fy,k (t). (8)
Now we can summarize the computation of the string shape
y(x, t ) as a response to an external force:
PUBLISHED IN IEEE TRANS. ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROC ESSING, VOL. 18, NO. 4, PP. 809–821, MAY 2010 4
1) Computation of the force Fy,k (t) acting on mode k,
which is the scalar product of the excitation-force den-
sity dy(x, t ) and the modal shape sin(kπx/L ), as in (4d)
2) Computation of the instantaneous amplitude yk(t) of
mode k by the convolution of the mode excitation force
Fy,k (t) and the mode impulse response yδ,k (t), as in (8)
3) Computation of the string shape by summing the modal
shapes sin(kπx/L ) multiplied by their instantaneous
amplitudes yk(t), as in (2).
Besides the string shape, we are also interested in the force
acting at the termination, because that will form the input o f
the soundboard modeling block. The bridge force Fb(t) at the
termination x = 0 is computed as follows:
Fb(t) = T0
∂y
∂x
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
x=0
= T0π
L
∞∑
k=1
k y k(t), (9)
which is a weighted sum of instantaneous modal amplitudes
yk(t).
B. Discretization
We have seen that either we are interested in the string
deﬂection or the force at the bridge, the computation has the
same structure: ﬁrst projecting the external force to the in put
forces of the modes, then ﬁltering with the impulse response s
of the modes, and ﬁnally projecting back to the variable of
interest (force or displacement). Since these projections do not
depend on the time variable, they are implemented in discret e
time without any modiﬁcations from the continuous-time cas e.
The only task left is to discretize the impulse response of th e
modes (5).
The discretization with respect to time can be done by vari-
ous methods. We have chosen the impulse invariant transform
[27], because in this case the discrete-time impulse respon se
of each mode will have a leading zero which results in a
one-sample delay. Therefore, we will avoid the problem of
delay free loops in excitation modeling that can arise in oth er
discretizations, such as the bilinear transform (see Sec. I V
for details). This useful initial zero in each modal impulse
response occurs because we are modeling string displacemen t
in response to a force excitation. With the impulse invarian t
transform, the discrete-time impulse response is obtained by
simply sampling the continuous-time impulse response (5a) ,
yielding
yδ,k [n] = yδ,k (tn) = 1
fs
Ake− tn
τ k sin(2πf ktn), (10)
where tn = nTs, Ts = 1 /f s being the sampling interval.
Equation (10) differs from (5a) by a scaling factor of 1/f s.
This scaling is required because the discrete-time unit pul se
has an area of 1/f s, while the continuous-time Dirac impulse
has unity area.
Taking the z transform of yδ,k [n], after some algebra, gives
Hres,k (z) = bkz−1
1 + a1,k z−1 + a2,k z−2 (11a)
bk = Ak
fs
Im{pk} (11b)
a1,k = −2Re{pk} (11c)
a2,k = |pk|2 (11d)
pk = ej2π
fk
fs e− 1
τ k fs . (11e)
That is, each mode is implemented by a two-pole ﬁlter and a
delay in series, as displayed in the top of Fig. 3 (the detaile d
description of the ﬁgure is left for Sec. IV).
IV. H AMMER MODELING
Generally, two distinct approaches are used for modeling the
excitation of piano strings. One commonly employed approach
is to model the excitation using a signal model [11], [15],
where the perceptual parameters of the resulting tone (loudness
of the partials) can be directly controlled. Another common
approach is physical modeling [20], [21], [6], [7], [22]. We
follow the physics-based approach in our work because we
believe that a fully physical excitation model is necessary to
provide the required responsiveness to the player. In addit ion,
its parameters, like hammer mass and hardness, are close to
those of a real piano, leading to an intuitive control for the
user.
Accordingly, the piano hammer is modeled by a small mass
connected to a nonlinear spring that contacts the string at
a mathematical point xh [28]. The equations describing the
interaction are as follows:
Fh(t) = F (∆ y) =
{
Kh(∆ y)Ph if∆ y > 0
0 if∆ y ≤ 0 , (12a)
Fh(t) = −mh
d2yh(t)
dt2 , (12b)
where Fh(t) is the interaction force, ∆ y = yh(t) − ys(t) is the
compression of the hammer felt, yh(t) is the position of the
hammer, and ys(t) is the position of the string at the excitation
point xh (i.e., ys(t) = y(xh, t )). The hammer mass is denoted
mh, Kh is the hammer stiffness coefﬁcient, and Ph is the
stiffness exponent. Example values for hammer parameters can
be found in [21].
These equations can be easily discretized with respect to
time. Equation (12a) is a static nonlinearity so it is imple-
mented as is. Equation (12b) can be converted to a discrete-
time system by the impulse invariant transform. Thus, the
discrete-time version of (12) is the following:
Fh[n] = F (∆ y) = F (yh[n] − ys[n]) (13a)
yh(z) = −Fh(z) 1
mh
( 1
fs
1
1 − z−1
) 2
z−1, (13b)
which is displayed in the bottom of Fig. 3. The extra delay
term z−1 is inserted in (13b) to avoid the delay-free loop that
would arise because there is a mutual dependence between
Fh[n] and yh[n]. That is, for the calculation of one of these
variables, the other should be known. Inserting the delay
PUBLISHED IN IEEE TRANS. ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROC ESSING, VOL. 18, NO. 4, PP. 809–821, MAY 2010 5
z-1
z-1
1 ,inw 1b 1 ,outw
1 , 1a−
1 , 2a−
1y
1 ,yF z-1
z-1
z-1
Kinw , Kb Koutw ,
Ka , 1−
Ka , 2−
Ky
KyF ,
z-1
1 ,bw
Kbw ,
z-1
sf
1
z-1
sf
1
hm
1−
F(Δy)
z-1
hF
hF
sy
hyhv
yΔ
1−
bF
hF sy
ha
Hammer model
Main string model
Fig. 3. The string and hammer models, and their interconnect ion.
comes from the assumption that the hammer position changes
a little during one time step yh[n] ≈ yh[n − 1], which
is generally true because yh[n] is computed as the double
integration of Fh[n].
It is a bigger problem in general that there is no delay
between the input (the string position ys[n]) and output (the
hammer force Fh[n]) of the hammer block. This means that
for computing the hammer force, the string displacement
should be known, which, in return, depends on the hammer
force. This again leads to a delay-free loop which is usually
resolved by assuming ys[n] ≈ ys[n−1], implemented by using
ys[n − 1] instead of ys[n] in (13a). However, this can lead to
numerical instabilities at high impact velocities [8], bec ause
the string signal can have large jumps violating the assumption
ys[n] ≈ ys[n − 1].
Nevertheless, in our special case, because of the right choice
of discretization of the string model in Sec. III-B, the dela y-
free loop does not arise because the string model contains a
delay element in the signal ﬂow (see (11a) and Fig. 3). Note
that in the case of different discretizations leading to a de lay-
free loop, special measures are needed to maintain numerica l
stability [29], [8].
The only parameters in Fig. 3 that have not been described
so far are the input and output weights of the string model. If
we assume that the hammer contacts the string at an inﬁnitely
small area at position xh, the excitation density for the string
becomes dy(x, t n) = δ (x − xh)Fh[n]. Computing the scalar
product of the Dirac function and the modal shape according
to (4d) leads to the following input weights of the resonator s:
win,k = sin
( kπx h
L
)
. (14)
Not so surprisingly, computing the string displacement ys =
y(xh, t n) at the hammer position xh by (2) leads to the same
weights as for win,k :
wout,k = sin
( kπx h
L
)
. (15)
The third set of weights wb,k are used to compute the bridge
force Fb[n] which is the input of the soundboard model. From
(9), these weights become:
wb,k = kπT 0
L . (16)
Figure 3 shows the hammer–string model in a form that
corresponds to the above derivations, but some simpliﬁcati ons
are possible to decrease computational complexity. Because of
linearity, we may lump the effects of coefﬁcients win,k , wout,k ,
wb,k , and bk of Fig. 3, so ﬁnally only two of them have to
be implemented. It is beneﬁcial to lump the coefﬁcients in
such a way that wb,k = 1 meaning that the bridge force is
computed as a simple summation. The hammer model runs
during the hammer–string contact only (ﬁrst few ms), therefore
the remaining two scalings have to be computed for a limited
amount of time. Additionally, the z−1 terms coming after the
bk coefﬁcient in Fig. 3 can be also lumped, therefore, only one
delay element has to be implemented for each string model.
We note that piano hammers are not fully characterized by
the model of (12), as the felt has a hysteretic behavior [28],
[30], and the vibration of the hammer shank can also have
some inﬂuence on the hammer force [31]. We neglect these
secondary phenomena in our hammer model.
V. L ONGITUDINAL STRING VIBRATIONS
In the piano string at fortissimo levels, because of the
relatively large amplitude of transverse vibration, the te nsion
is not anymore constant, resulting in a nonlinear excitatio n of
longitudinal modes. The perceptual effect is most importan t in
the low note range where it greatly contributes to the metall ic
character of the tone (the interested reader may listen to th e
examples at the companion page of [12]). The importance of
these spectral components has been recognized long ago by
piano builders [32]. In addition to the longitudinal modal f re-
quencies, a second series of partials with lower inharmonic ity
coefﬁcient has also been found in piano tones [33], which
was named “phantom partials” later [34]. It has turned out
that phantom partials are also generated by the longitudina l
motion of the string, as a response to the tension variation
coming from the transverse string motion [12]. In other word s,
longitudinal modal peaks and phantom partials are the free
and the forced response of the same system, respectively.
Therefore, a single model can describe both phenomena, which
will be outlined in this section. The related theory has been
developed in [12] and in [35] independently.
A very efﬁcient way of modeling the perceptual effect of
phantom partials has been presented in [36], but it has a
PUBLISHED IN IEEE TRANS. ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROC ESSING, VOL. 18, NO. 4, PP. 809–821, MAY 2010 6
loose connection to physical reality. In [12] and in Chap. 6
of [13] various, more physically meaningful techniques wer e
presented. We propose a new variation of these physics-base d
techniques, which provides greater accuracy at a negligibl e
increase in computational complexity.
A. Continuous-time equations
The wave equation for the longitudinal motion takes the
following form [13]:
µ ∂ 2ξ
∂t 2 = ES ∂ 2ξ
∂x 2 − 2Rξ µ ∂ξ
∂t + 1
2 ES
∂
(
∂y
∂x
) 2
∂x , (17)
where Rξ is the frictional resistance of the longitudinal polar-
ization (frequency dependency will be introduced later in ( 21)
by using different Rξ for the various modes). Equation (17) is
a linear wave equation with a nonlinear forcing term depending
on the transverse slope. By comparing (17) with (1) it can be
noticed that the two equations are of the same form, and they
differ only in their parameters: T0 is substituted by ES, and
the dispersion term (fourth order spatial derivative) is mi ssing.
The external force density dy(x, t ) is replaced by
dξ (x, t ) = 1
2 ES
∂
(
∂y
∂x
) 2
∂x , (18)
which represents the excitation from the transverse polari za-
tion.
1) Longitudinal motion: The formal similarity to (1) means
that the results of Sec. III can be directly used. By assuming
inﬁnitely rigid terminations, the longitudinal displacem ent can
be written in its modal form
ξ (x, t ) =
∞∑
k=1
ξ k(t) sin
( kπx
L
)
. (19)
Accordingly, the instantaneous amplitude ξ k(t) of the longi-
tudinal mode k is obtained as
ξ k(t) = Fξ,k (t) ∗ ξ δ,k (t), (20a)
Fξ,k (t) =
∫ L
0
dξ (x, t ) sin
( kπx
L
)
dx, (20b)
ξ δ,k (t) = 1
πLµf ξ,k
e
− t
τ ξ,k sin (2πf ξ,k t) , (20c)
where Fξ,k (t) is the excitation force acting on the longitudinal
mode k. The time-domain impulse response of longitudinal
mode k is denoted by ξ δ,k (t).
For small frictional resistance, the longitudinal modal fr e-
quencies fξ,k and decay times τ ξ,k are
fξ,k = kfξ, 0 = k
2L
√
ES
µ and τ ξ,k = 1
Rξ,k
, (21)
where fξ, 0 = fξ, 1 is the fundamental frequency of the
longitudinal vibration. In practice, the fundamental freq uency
of the longitudinal vibration in piano strings is around 16 t o
20 times higher than that of the transverse vibration [32].
The ﬁrst step in calculating the longitudinal motion is the
computation of the excitation force Fξ,k (t) by Eq. (20b),
which is the scalar product of the excitation-force density
dξ (x, t ) and the longitudinal modal shape. If the transverse
vibration is expressed in the modal form of (2), from (18) and
(20b) it turns out that a longitudinal mode with mode number
k is excited by such transverse mode pairs m and n only, for
which either the sum m + n or the difference |m − n| of their
mode numbers equal to k [12].
The two cases can be computed separately by deﬁning
Fξ,k (t) as a sum of two components, i.e., Fξ,k (t) = Fξ,k (t)++
Fξ,k (t)−. The component originating from the transverse
modes that satisfy m + n = k is
Fξ,k (t)+ = −ES π 3
8L2 k
k−1∑
n=1
n(k − n) yn(t)yk−n(t). (22a)
The component coming from |m − n| = k becomes
Fξ,k (t)− = −2ES π 3
8L2 k
∞∑
n=1
n(k + n) yn(t)yk+n(t). (22b)
That is, the various terms of the longitudinal excitation fo rce
are the products of the instantaneous amplitudes of two tran s-
verse modes, ym(t) and yn(t), meaning that the longitudinal
modes will be excited at the sum and difference frequencies
of transverse modes.
The force exciting the ﬁrst longitudinal mode Fξ, 1(t) is
displayed in Fig. 4 (a) by a solid line, computed by the
discrete-time implementation of the modal model described by
(22) and (20). The simulation example is a G1 piano string.
Note that the excitation force has an odd-like partial serie s
and a lower inharmonicity compared to the spectrum of the
transverse bridge force [12], which is displayed by dots to
show the transverse modal frequencies as a reference. The
dashed line indicates the Fourier transform of the impulse
response of the ﬁrst longitudinal mode ξ δ, 1(t), amplifying the
frequencies around 690 Hz. Figure 4 (b) shows the excitation -
force spectrum of the second longitudinal mode for the same
example. It can be seen that here the excitation spectrum
contains even partials only and that the peak of the longitudinal
mode (dashed line) is located at a higher frequency (1380 Hz
in this case). It is also true for all other longitudinal mode s
that odd modes are excited by an odd-like spectrum and even
longitudinal modes by an even-like. However, the frequenci es
of the excitation components will be slightly different eve n
within the odd and even modes, because of the inharmonicity
of the transverse vibration [12].
The longitudinal motion is the sum of the motion of
different modes. This means that spectra similar to Figs. 4
(a) and (b) should be superimposed with only slightly shifte d
excitation frequencies and very different longitudinal mo dal
frequencies. The result is similar to formants on a quasi-
harmonic spectrum but here the peaks are somewhat smeared
as they are made up of many close frequencies [12].
2) Bridge force: If the instantaneous amplitudes yn(t) of
the transverse modes are known, the longitudinal displacement
can be directly computed by the use of (22), (20) and (19).
However, we still need to compute the force Fb,ξ (t) acting
on the bridge in the longitudinal direction, since that is le d to
PUBLISHED IN IEEE TRANS. ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROC ESSING, VOL. 18, NO. 4, PP. 809–821, MAY 2010 7
0 0.5 1 1.5 240
60
80
100Magnitude [dB]
(a)
0 0.5 1 1.5 240
60
80
100
(b)
Frequency [kHz]
Magnitude [dB]
Fig. 4. The force spectrum exciting the ﬁrst (a) and the secon d (b)
longitudinal modes ( Fξ, 1(t) and Fξ, 2(t)) of a simulated G1 piano string
(solid line). The transverse bridge force (dotted line) is d isplayed to show the
transverse modal frequencies. The dashed lines show the fre quency response
of the ﬁrst (a) and the second (b) longitudinal modes. The hor izontal dash-
dotted lines are the low frequency approximations of the cor responding
frequency responses. The relative levels of the signals are arbitrary.
the input of the soundboard model. The bridge force Fb,ξ (t)
equals the tension at the termination [12]:
Fb,ξ (t) = T0 + ES ∂ξ
∂x
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
x=0
+ 1
2 ES
( ∂y
∂x
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
x=0
) 2
. (23)
Equation (23) shows that the force Fb,ξ (t) depends not only
on the longitudinal motion but on the transverse vibration a s
well. Due to the second-order nonlinearity, the component
coming from the transverse motion has the same sum- and
difference frequency terms as the component arising from
the longitudinal motion, but their amplitudes and phases ar e
different.
It can be seen in Fig. 4 (dashed lines) that the longitudinal
modes have a constant gain under their resonance frequency.
Therefore, let’s assume for the moment that all the longitudinal
modes are excited below their resonance. The transfer function
of longitudinal mode k is the Laplace transform of Eq. (20c):
L{ξ δ,k (t)} = 2
Lµ
1
s2 + 2
τ ξ,k
s + 1
τ 2
ξ,k
+ 4π 2f 2
ξ,k
, (24)
from which the low frequency response ξ δ,k (t) of the resonator
can be approximated as a constant gain by assuming s → 0
and 1/τ ξ,k ≪ fξ,k :
ξ δ,k (t) = − 2
Lµ 4π 2f 2
ξ,k
δ (t). (25)
The transfer function corresponding to Eq. (25) (which is a
constant gain) is displayed for longitudinal mode 1 and 2 in
Fig. 4. If Eq. (25) holds for all the longitudinal modes, that is,
all the longitudinal modes are excited signiﬁcantly below t heir
resonance frequency, most of the transverse and longitudin al
terms cancel out in (23) and only the double frequency terms
remain [12], [13]. This means that the tension is spatially
uniform along the string, and the bridge force becomes
Fb,ξ (t) =
T (t) = T0 + π 2ES
4L2
∞∑
n=1
n2y2
n(t), (26)
which is a simple squared sum of the instantaneous modal
amplitudes yn(t) of the transverse polarization. Note that
this corresponds to the case when the ﬁrst and second time
derivatives in (17) are zero (inertial and viscosity effect s are
negligible), thus, the dynamics of the longitudinal modes p lay
no role [12]. As a result, the longitudinal motion simply
follows the transverse one due to the fact that tension along
the string tries to reach an equilibrium state. We may call th is
as a “static motion” of longitudinal modes.
Equation (25) holds for most of the longitudinal modes.
Nevertheless, it does not hold for the lowest K modes, which
are also excited around or above their resonant frequency. F or
these modes a correction is made by subtracting their static dc
response (which is already included in the tension computed
by Eq. (26)) and adding their real, frequency dependent
response:
Fb,ξ (t) = T (x, 0) =
T (t) + ES π
L
K∑
k=1
k ˜ξ k(t), (27)
where ˜ξ k(t) is the “dynamic response” of mode k, i.e., that
portion of the motion which is in addition to the static
stretching. It is computed as
˜ξ k(t) = Fξ,k (t) ∗ (ξ δ,k (t) −
ξ δ,k (t)). (28)
Note that the terms ξ δ,k (t) − ξ δ,k (t) = ˜ξ δ,k (t) correspond to
a resonant second-order high-pass ﬁlter, since they are the
difference of a low-pass and a constant response.
Despite the quite complicated math we had to go through,
we end up with a relatively simple series of steps for comput-
ing the longitudinal bridge force as a function of transvers e
motion:
1) Computation of the excitation force Fξ,k (t) acting on
longitudinal mode k as pairwise products of transverse
mode amplitudes yn(t) and ym(t) by (22)
2) Computation of the spatially uniform part of the tension
T (t) by the squared sum of yn(t) by (26)
3) Computation of the dynamic responses ˜ξ k(t) for the ﬁrst
K longitudinal modes according to (28)
4) Correcting the spatially uniform tension T (t) by the
weighted sum of the dynamic responses ˜ξ k(t) of the
ﬁrst K longitudinal modes by (27)
This tension correction has to be done only for those longi-
tudinal modes, which are excited above and under resonance.
That is, the resonance frequency of each longitudinal mode
should be compared with the bandwidth of Fξ,k , which is the
double of that of the transverse vibration due to the second-
order nonlinearity. This leads to K taking on values between
2 to 10 in practice.
PUBLISHED IN IEEE TRANS. ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROC ESSING, VOL. 18, NO. 4, PP. 809–821, MAY 2010 8
B. Discretization
1) The precise model: The above steps can be easily
discretized with respect to time. Again, the only part that needs
consideration is the dynamics of the longitudinal modes. Th e
impulse response ξ δ,k (t) of mode k is discretized exactly in
the same way as that of the transverse modes, resulting in
a ﬁlter of the form (11). Then, the dynamic response of the
longitudinal modes ˜ξ k(t) is calculated by subtracting the static
response of the modes, which is computed by multiplying Fξ,k
with the DC gain of the longitudinal resonators.
However, because the excitation signal of longitudinal
modes is obtained by multiplying the instantaneous amplitudes
of transverse modes according to (22), aliasing should be
considered. It turns out that because modal synthesis is use d,
aliasing can be easily avoided (in contrast to, e.g., ﬁnite
difference string models). We just have to take care not to
implement any of the products in (22) and (26) where the
sum frequency would go beyond the Nyquist limit fs/ 2. This
way we also throw away some difference-frequency terms
from (22) that would not be aliased, but this is of no concern
because these low-frequency terms would be attenuated by
the high-pass ﬁlters implementing the dynamic response of
the longitudinal modes anyway. Since the transverse modal
frequencies are known, it is easy to decide which terms shoul d
be discarded from (22) and (26). However, it is a reasonable
simpliﬁcation to limit the computation of (22) and (26) for
such transverse modes whose frequencies are below the half
of the Nyquist rate, that is, to compute (22) and (26) up to
transverse mode N for which fN < f s/ 4.
2) Efﬁcient modeling: Since typically only K < 10 longi-
tudinal resonances are within the audible range, the ﬁlteri ng
needed to compute the dynamic response of the longitudinal
modes ˜ξ k(t) is negligible compared to that of transverse
vibration, where hundreds of modes are computed. The com-
putational complexity lies in (22), where hundreds of pairw ise
products of transverse amplitudes yn(t) has to be calculated.
As an example, for K = 10 longitudinal and N = 100 trans-
verse partials, this leads to 1000 multiplications and addi tions,
so we may seek at some more efﬁcient implementations.
As noted earlier, odd longitudinal modes are excited by an
odd-like spectrum, while even ones with an even-like, and th e
odd and even spectra are similar (the frequencies are only
slightly shifted due to the inharmonicity). Example spectr a
can be found in Chap. 6 of [13]. Therefore, similarly to the
synthesis models of [12], we compute a single excitation for ce
for the odd longitudinal modes and another one for the even
ones. For example, all the longitudinal modes with odd mode
number k are excited by the same force as computed for
mode 3 ( Fξ,k (t) = Fξ, 3(t) for odd k), and all the longitudinal
modes with even mode number k are excited by the same
force as mode 4 ( Fξ,k (t) = Fξ, 4(t) for even k). Naturally,
other excitation force pairs (such as Fξ, 1(t) and Fξ, 2(t)) can
also be chosen. Additionally, only the Fξ,k (t)− part of (22)
is computed, since the Fξ,k (t)+ part contains low frequency
components that are out of the passband of the high-pass ﬁlte r
implementing the dynamic response of the longitudinal mode
˜ξ δ,k (t).
It is worth noting that both in (26) and in (22b) the trans-
verse terms appearing are always of the form nyn(t), which is
the instantaneous amplitude of the transverse mode multipl ied
by its mode number. The same multiplication is needed in
(9), therefore, no additional multiplications are needed h ere.
For computing (22b) the transverse mode outputs are simply
tapped before the bridge summation point and those outputs
are pairwise multiplied which has a mode number difference
of k, and the products are summed. From a computational
viewpoint, since the transverse modal amplitudes are store d
in a vector, this means correlating the vector and its shifte d
version. For (26) the squared sum of the same vector is
computed.
Note that in the sound synthesis model of [12] the transverse
contribution (last term of (23)) was simply neglected, whic h
has led to the appearance of some unwanted low-frequency
components that should otherwise cancel out, as described
in Sec. V-A2. This is avoided in the proposed model, since
now the effect of the transverse vibration on the longitudin al
bridge force is also included. This is accomplished by the
additional computation of the string tension (26), and by
ﬁltering the longitudinal excitation force by the dynamic
part of the longitudinal response ˜ξ δ,k (t) (resonant high-pass
ﬁlter) instead of the full response ξ δ,k (t) (resonant low-pass
ﬁlter). As a result, the new model is more precise, while the
computational cost is increased only slightly by the additi onal
tension computation of (26).
VI. S TRING COUPLING
Coupling effects in transverse string vibrations occur at t wo
different levels: ﬁrst of all, even a single string vibrates both
in the horizontal and vertical plane, and these vibrations a re
coupled through the bridge. The situation gets even more
complex for the piano because for most of the keys three
slightly mistuned strings are sounded together. This resul ts
in beating and two-stage decay [37], where the ﬁrst is a low-
frequency amplitude modulation of partial envelopes, and t he
second means that the partial decay is faster in the early par t
than in the latter.
At a second level, and with lower efﬁciency, coupling
between strings occurs not only for the two or three differen t
strings belonging to the same key, but also between the
strings of various keys. This effect (sometimes referred to as
sympathetic resonances) is most prominent when the dampers
of the strings are raised by the sustain pedal, leading to the
coupling of all the strings of the piano. In fact, the bridge–
soundboard system connects the strings together and acts as a
distributed driving-point impedance for string terminati ons.
Both of these two phenomena are modeled by the “Sec-
ondary resonators” in Fig. 2.
A. Beating and two-stage decay
The simplest way to model beating and two-stage decay is
to use two string models in parallel for a single note. Varyin g
by the type of coupling used, many different solutions have
been presented in the literature [38], [39], [10].
PUBLISHED IN IEEE TRANS. ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROC ESSING, VOL. 18, NO. 4, PP. 809–821, MAY 2010 9
A computationally more efﬁcient, perception-based ap-
proach is to model the beating and two-stage decay for those
partials only where the phenomenon is audibly prominent. One
way of achieving this is to implement a few (5–10) resonators
in parallel, driven by the excitation signal [7], [8]. Anoth er
option is the beating equalizer [15], where the partial enve lope
is modulated by a peak EQ tuned to the frequency of the
partial.
In this work, we are modeling beating and two-stage decay
by adding a set of secondary resonators to the string model,
driven by the hammer force. This is displayed in Fig. 2.
Depending on the parameterization of the resonators, they
can be seen as additional string models, or, they can be used
for a perception-based efﬁcient modeling, where only a few
additional resonators are implemented. We have chosen to
implement them as additional string models with a full set of
modes (albeit with less modes than the main string), because
the same structure will be used to model the sustain pedal
effect (see Sec. VI-B). The resonators are implemented by
second-order IIR ﬁlters, exactly as described in Sec. III-B ,
resulting in a coherent model structure. The only differenc e
from the resonators of the main string models that the string
displacement does not have to be computed, thus, coefﬁcient s
wout,k in Fig. 3 are missing, and only the bridge force is
computed by wb,k . Accordingly, the effect of win,k , bk, and
wb,k can be lumped to a single coefﬁcient.
B. Sympathetic resonances
It is relatively straightforward to model sympathetic res-
onances in digital waveguides with bi-directional couplin g
between the strings, when all the strings are connected to th e
same termination [3], [6]. Implementing numerically stable bi-
directional coupling is more complicated in modal synthesi s;
therefore, we are applying a simpliﬁcation where the coupli ng
of the strings is uni-directional. This leads to a “structur ally
stable” solution, meaning that the coupled model is stable
for any choice of the coupling parameters. For this, several
different variations have been presented in the literature [38],
[15].
Our choice is similar to [38], where the outputs of the main
string models are summed and feed to the secondary resonators
of all string models, as shown in Fig. 2. This way, energy is
ﬂowing from the main string models to the secondary ones,
but not vice-versa. The simplest way of implementing this is
to sum the outputs of all string models, multiply them with a
constant coefﬁcient, and then distribute this signal to all sec-
ondary resonator banks. However, it is also possible to cont rol
the strength of coupling between the strings, resulting in a
more realistic behavior. This can be achieved by subdividin g
the strings into R different regions [40], where the cumulated
string outputs are Fb = [Fb, 0, . . . , F b,R ] and the inputs of the
secondary resonator groups are Fp = [ Fp, 0, . . . , F p,R ]. The
coupling is controlled by a R × R gain matrix B:
Fp = B F b. (29)
In our implementation, we have chosen a subdivision in R = 8
keyboard regions, requiring an additional 64 multiplicati ons
and additions.
VII. S OUNDBOARD MODELING
As already mentioned in Sec. II, only the radiation effects
of the soundboard are implemented here, while the impedance
effects are taken into account in the string model.
The computationally most efﬁcient way of implementing
the effect of the soundboard ﬁltering is commuted synthesis
[4], [5], where the order of the model blocks (hammer–
string–soundboard) is commuted: the impulse response of
the soundboard excites the strings and the effect of the
hammer is taken into account as a ﬁltering operation. Thus,
the soundboard response is implemented as a wavetable,
resulting in a low computational complexity. However, the
method assumes linearity and time-invariance, therefore, some
important effects, such as the restrike of the same string or the
nonlinear vibration of strings, cannot be precisely modele d.
Another efﬁcient way of implementing the effect of the
soundboard is to apply a reverberation-like algorithm. Ex-
amples include the coupled digital waveguides in [3], and
feedback delay networks in [6], [7]. A difﬁculty of these
reverberator-based approaches is that only the statistica l dis-
tribution and the overall damping of the body modes can be
set by the available parameter estimation techniques.
In ﬁlter-based techniques, the measured force–pressure
transfer function of a real piano soundboard is used as a
target speciﬁcation for ﬁlter design. The most straightfor ward
approach is the use of a ﬁnite impulse response (FIR) ﬁlter
obtained by windowing of the measured impulse response. The
drawback is that long ﬁlters are required: for a good tonalit y,
1000-2000 tap FIR ﬁlters are needed at fs = 44 . 1 kHz, and
for reproducing the characteristic knock sound of the middl e
and high notes, ten thousands of taps are needed. Therefore, a
direct FIR implementation is not advantageous. Either a mul ti-
rate approach can be used [8], [13], or the FIR ﬁlter should
be implemented as a fast convolution algorithm. The latter h as
been implemented in our real-time piano model and will be
outlined in Sec. VII-A.
Another option is the use of a specially designed inﬁnite
impulse response (IIR) ﬁlter, where a quasi-logarithmic fr e-
quency resolution can lead to large computational savings
compared to traditional FIR and IIR ﬁlter designs. The most
commonly used technique is frequency warping, where the
z−1 elements of traditional ﬁlters are replaced by ﬁrst-order
allpass ﬁlters [41]. Kautz ﬁlters [42] can be seen as the
generalization of warped FIR ﬁlters with more ﬂexibility
in determining the frequency resolution. Fixed-pole paral lel
ﬁlters [43] produce the same results as the Kautz ﬁlters but
lead to a simpler ﬁlter structure. Soundboard modeling with
parallel ﬁlters is summarized in Sec. VII-B.
The impulse response of the soundboards varies as a func-
tion of bridge excitation point. This can be simulated by having
different soundboard ﬁlters for the different regions of th e
bridge. In addition, for each region, two ﬁlter outputs are
needed for stereo effect. This complexity can be reduced by
implementing only one high-order soundboard ﬁlter (or a ﬁlt er
pair for stereo output) and additional low-order shaping ﬁl ters
for the different regions of the bridge, to account for the to nal
differences between them [7].
PUBLISHED IN IEEE TRANS. ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROC ESSING, VOL. 18, NO. 4, PP. 809–821, MAY 2010 10
A. Partitioned convolution by FFT
A very efﬁcient way to implement the convolution required
by soundboard ﬁltering is adopting a partitioned FFT-based
convolution, like the overlap-and-add (OLA) method, which
is well documented in standard digital signal processing te xt-
books [44].
Both the input signal (i.e., the total force at the bridge)
and the soundboard impulse response are partitioned in bloc ks
which are N samples long. In a typical software implementa-
tion, N can be taken equal to the internal buffer size of the
soundcard, thus avoiding any additional latency in the com-
putation. For each output buffer, we need to take a 2N point
FFT of the input buffer, then multiply the result with every
block of the transfer function and ﬁnally compute the result
by taking a 2N point IFFT. If we denote with M the length of
the impulse response, the total cost per buffer is O(N log N )
for the Fourier transforms and 4(N + 1) ⌈M/N ⌉ = O(M )
for the multiplication in the frequency domain. Therefore, the
cost per input sample is O(log N + M/N ), which is typically
dominated by the complex multiplication when N is small,
as it is the case when low-latency processing is needed. As
an example, with a typical soundboard length of 20000 taps
and block size N=128, the multiplication in the frequency
domain requires 633 ﬂoating point operations at each time
sample. This computational complexity could be decreased i f
necessary by combining the FFT-based convolution with multi-
rate ﬁltering, such as [8], [13], at the expense of somewhat
more complicated model structure and parameter estimation .
It is possible to avoid the trade-off between computational
load and processing delay by using a non-uniform partitioni ng
scheme [45], [46]. With these algorithms, the principal issue is
ﬁnding an optimal scheduling of the different computationa l
tasks in order to get a constant load suitable for real-time
implementations.
B. Fixed-pole parallel second-order ﬁlters
Another option is to model the soundboard as a set of
second-order parallel ﬁlters [43]. Implementing IIR ﬁlter s in
the form of parallel second-order sections has been used tra -
ditionally because it has good quantization noise performa nce
and the possibility of code parallelization. The parameter s of
the second-order sections are usually determined from dire ct
form IIR ﬁlters by partial fraction expansion [27]. Here the
poles are set to a predetermined (e.g., logarithmic) freque ncy
scale, leaving the zeros as free parameters for optimizatio n. In
the case of modeling a desired impulse response, the paralle l
ﬁlter uses the outputs of the second-order sections (expo-
nentially decaying sinusoidal functions) as basis functio ns of
a linear-in-parameter model. In addition to the second-ord er
sections, it is beneﬁcial to include a parallel FIR path for t he
modeling of non-minimumphase responses. Thus, the transfe r
function becomes
H(z−1) =
K∑
k=1
dk, 0 + dk, 1z−1
1 + ak, 1z−1 + ak, 2z−2 +
M∑
m=0
bmz−m (30)
where K is the number of second order sections. The ﬁlter
structure is depicted in Fig. 5
Input 
0 , 1d
1−z
2
2 , 1
1
1 , 11
1
−− ++ zaza 1 , 1d
0 ,Kd
1−z
2
2 ,
1
1 ,1
1
−− ++ zaza KK
1 ,Kd
0b
1−z
1b
MbMz−
.
.
.
.
Optional 
FIR part 
Output 
Fig. 5. Structure of the parallel second-order ﬁlter.
Since we are aiming at a logarithmic frequency resolution,
the poles are set to a logarithmic scale
ϑ k = 2πf k
fs
(31)
pk = Rϑ k/π e±jϑ k (32)
where ϑ k are the pole frequencies in radians determined by the
logarithmic frequency series fk and the sampling frequency
fs. The pole radii form an exponentially damped sequence
approximating constant Q resolution. The pole radius at fs/ 2
is set by the damping parameter R, similarly as proposed for
Kautz ﬁlters in [47].
It can be seen in (30) and in Fig. 5 that since the poles
determine the coefﬁcients of the denominators ak, 1 and ak, 2,
(30) becomes linear in its free parameters dk, 1, dk, 2, and bm,
which can be calculated in a closed form by standard least-
squares equations from the measured soundboard response
[43].
Figure 6 (a) shows the frequency response of a parallel
second-order design with 100 logarithmically spaced poles
with R = 0 . 98, giving a ﬁlter order of 200. The order of
the FIR part M was set to zero, resulting in a canonical
structure containing second-order IIR sections only. The t ime-
domain response of Fig. 6 shows that the parallel ﬁlter can
follow the long-ringing modes due to its logarithmic frequency
resolution.
A beneﬁt of using the parallel ﬁlter instead of the FFT-
based convolution is that this results in a coherent model
structure, a “fully modal” piano, since the structure of the
soundboard model is essentially the same as that of the strin g
model, the only difference is that now each second-order ﬁlt er
has a zero as well. Although the pole frequencies of the
soundboard ﬁlter differ from the actual modal frequencies o f
the measured soundboard (the poles of the ﬁlter are set to a
logarithmic scale by (31) and (32)), we may consider each
second-order section as implementing one normal mode of
the soundboard vibration. This analogy leads to interestin g
parameter modiﬁcations. The resonance frequencies of the
second-order ﬁlters (pole angles) can be changed to simulat e
a bigger or smaller instrument body, and the decay times of
the body modes can be inﬂuenced by varying the pole radii.
Changing the overall magnitude response can be accomplished
PUBLISHED IN IEEE TRANS. ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROC ESSING, VOL. 18, NO. 4, PP. 809–821, MAY 2010 11
10
2
10
3
10
4−100
−50
0
Frequency [Hz]
Magnitude [dB]
(a)
0 500 1000 1500 2000−0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Time [samples]
Amplitude
(b)
Fig. 6. Frequency (a) and time-domain (b) responses of a 200t h order parallel
second-order ﬁlter design with logarithmic pole positioni ng. In (a) and (b),
the top curve is the ﬁlter response, while the bottom is the ta rget (the time-
and frequency-domain ﬁlter responses are shifted for clari ty).
Synthesis block MPOS for a single note Overall cost
Transversal vibration 2 × N (free string) 40%
Hammer update 2 × N + 3 (+static nonlinearity) 5%
Secondary resonators 3 × N2 30%
Longitudinal vibration 3 × Nexc + 3 × Nl 25%
TABLE I
COMPUTATIONAL COST OF STRING AND HAMMER MODELING .
by scaling the feedforward coefﬁcients dk, 0 and dk, 1 of Fig. 5,
without an additional ﬁlter. These modiﬁcations can be carr ied
out even in run-time for special effects. Multiple outputs ( e.g.,
for stereo effects) can be efﬁciently achieved by using the same
set of poles for the different channels, thus, only the outpu t
coefﬁcients of Fig. 5 have to be implemented for the channels
separately [43].
According to preliminary comparisons, the computational
complexity seems to be larger compared to the partitioned
convolution for the same sound quality. On the other hand, th e
parallel ﬁlter requires signiﬁcantly smaller amount of mem ory,
has zero latency and results in a simpler code, which may be
beneﬁcial in some DSP implementations. Although it is not yet
part of the current real-time piano implementation, we have
good experience with ofﬂine simulations.
VIII. S OFTWARE IMPLEMENTATION
We have implemented our model in the form of a real-
time software, written in C++ using the RtAudio and RtMidi
classes from the Synthesis Tool Kit (STK) [48]. The design
of the software architecture was driven by the requirements of
ﬂexibility in the control and efﬁciency for real-time use.
Flexible control is achieved by imposing a strong modularity
on the system. The different tasks are separated into three
categories, depending on the rate at which they are executed
at run-time. Obviously, the arithmetic-intensive operati ons
required for the synthesis are performed for each audio sample,
i.e., at the audio rate (sampling rate fs). Polyphony man-
agement, hammer initialization and all the other operation s
that depend directly on player interaction are performed at
MIDI rate = fs/N a, where Na is the audio buffer size.
Finally, run-time modiﬁcations of the synthesis parameter s
are handled at a calibration rate , which is the slowest one,
usually between 20 and 50 Hz. Calibration parameters are
received from an external program running a graphical user
interface, or alternatively with MIDI control change messa ges.
The processing of these parameters may be computationally
expensive, but it is performed asynchronously at a low rate,
so real-time performance is not affected.
In order to plan efﬁcient optimizations on the structure, it
is important to estimate the computational cost of each note ,
which can vary signiﬁcantly from the bass to the treble range .
The cost of each synthesis block is summarized in Table I in
terms of the number of the primary resonators N, secondary
resonators N2, longitudinal resonators Nl and the number
Nexc of transverse modes used for computing the excitation
force for the longitudinal vibration. Figure 7 shows typica l
values for the number of resonators in a practical calibrati on
of the model. The number of resonators is derived by imposing
an upper limit on their frequency and an additional absolute
limit on the number of resonators.
Basically, we need to perform 3 MPOS (multiplications
per output sample) per resonating ﬁlter if there is a non-zer o
input signal, and only 2 for the free evolution of the ﬁlter.
Moreover, if the hammer is exciting the string, we also need
to consider the cost for updating the string position at cont act
point (N MPOS), plus the cost of updating Eq. (13). Finally,
longitudinal excitation force computation requires three MPOS
for every transverse partial involved, one for the spatiall y
constant tension term of Eq. (26), and two for the products of
Eq. (22b) since the excitation force is computed for one odd
and one even longitudinal mode. The estimated relative overall
cost when all the notes are sounding is indicated in the third
column of Table I. The computation assumes that the hammer
is active only for a limited amount of time, as in normal
playing conditions. Note that the number of multiplication s
do not precisely represent the resulting computational loa d
in modern processors, since that will highly depend on the
efﬁciency of memory access (cache), pipeline stalls, code a nd
data parallelization, etc. However, they can still give an i dea
about the relative computational load of the various parts o f
the model.
One nice feature of the modal based approach is that paral-
lelization is very straightforward for most of the componen ts.
In our particular implementation, we have taken advantage
of the parallel capabilities of current x86 PCs, but similar
approaches are applicable to most of shared-memory paralle l
architectures, which also include custom DSP boards. The
parallel bank of ﬁlters of Figure 3 can be easily implemented
in a SIMD (single instruction multiple data) fashion. We use d
Intel’s SSE instructions [49], which can produce a speed-up
factor of almost four times with single precision ﬂoating po int
data.
Soundboard ﬁltering is implemented by a fast convolution
engine with uniform partition size, using the efﬁcient FFTW
PUBLISHED IN IEEE TRANS. ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROC ESSING, VOL. 18, NO. 4, PP. 809–821, MAY 2010 12
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 900
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Note number
Number of partials
 
 
N
N2
Nexc
Nl
Fig. 7. Number of resonators for each note. N refers to primary resonators,
N2 to the secondary ones, Nl to the longitudinal modes and Nexc is
the number of transversal partials used for longitudinal ex citation force
computation.
library [50]. By looking at the general diagram of Figure 2,
it is easy to notice that the soundboard radiation ﬁlter can
be run in parallel with the rest of the model. In our imple-
mentation, we exploit the multicore capabilities of curren t
processors by performing soundboard ﬁltering in a separate
thread, which communicates with the main synthesis thread
through a ring buffer. The drawback is that some additional
latency is introduced, which can be avoided in hardware
with ﬁner synchronization capabilities of DSP boards. The
computational load of soundboard ﬁltering varies dependin g
on the number of convolutions, the length of each ﬁlter and
the implementation used. In our case, running four 20000 tap
convolutions requires around one fourth of the resources us ed
by string and hammer modeling at full polyphony.
Our software is able to run at full polyphony, with a total
number of 10000 second-order resonators and four 20000 tap
convolutions, at an approximate load of 30% on a Intel’s Core
2 Duo@2.4 GHz laptop. The computational cost can be further
reduced by applying some sort of polyphony management.
By knowing the approximate cost of each note, we have
implemented a polyphony queue where the limit is imposed
on the total computational cost and not on the number of the
notes. It is possible to further extend this approach in many
ways, for example by selectively deactivating the partials of a
single note when they are not audible anymore. The only limit
coming from the architecture of the model is that the secondary
bank of resonators cannot be deactivated, since they are als o
used for simulating sympathetic resonances.
The interested reader may listen to the sound examples at
http://www.mit.bme.hu/∼bank/publist/taslp-piano.
IX. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH
This paper has presented a real-time piano model based
on recent developments in string modeling. The main string
model is based on the discretization of the modal solution
of the wave equation, and it is connected to a nonlinear
hammer model. The problem of delay-free loops is avoided
by the appropriate choice of discretization. The effects of
beating and two-stage decay are modeled by a secondary
bank of resonators, driven by the excitation force of the
main string model. Sympathetic resonances are synthesized
by redistributing some parts of the outputs of the main
string models to the secondary resonators. The bridge force
arising due to nonlinearly excited longitudinal vibration s is
computed by ﬁrst assuming spatially uniform tension, then
correcting this with the dynamics of longitudinal modes.
The proposed method provides greater accuracy compared to
earlier techniques, while does not increase the computatio nal
complexity signiﬁcantly. For soundboard modeling, the FFT -
based partitioned convolution and a ﬁlter structure simila r to
that of the string model was considered. The computational
cost of the string parts was estimated based on the number
of resonators, and the details of the software implementati ons
were also given.
In the current piano model, dampers are implemented by
simply decreasing the decay times of the resonators. For
future work, a physics-based damper model would increase
the realism of the note off sounds signiﬁcantly and would
allow the simulation of part pedaling. The soundboard model s
based on fast convolution and parallel second-order ﬁlters
should be evaluated from a perceptual point of view. That
is, the computational complexity of the two methods that
is required for reaching the same subjective quality should
be determined by listening tests. Finally, the combination of
the two approaches could possibly lead to an even higher
efﬁciency.
In our piano model, all the parts are real physical models
except the soundboard, which is implemented as a digital ﬁlt er
and parameterized from measured transfer functions. In the
far future, it might be possible to incorporate a physics-ba sed
soundboard model based on ﬁnite difference or ﬁnite element
modeling. Alternatively, the soundboard impulse response
could be computed at calibration rate by ﬁnite difference
or ﬁnite element modeling, and implemented as a ﬁltering
algorithm, allowing the modiﬁcation of the geometrical and
material properties of the soundboard in run time.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Dr. L´ aszl´ o Sujbert, Zsolt
Garamv¨ olgyi, the Associate Editor Prof. Julius Smith, andthe
anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Hiller and P. Ruiz, “Synthesizing musical sounds by so lving the wave
equation for vibrating objects: Part 1,” J. Audio Eng. Soc., vol. 19, no. 6,
pp. 462–470, June 1971.
[2] ——, “Synthesizing musical sounds by solving the wave equ ation for
vibrating objects: Part 2,”J. Audio Eng. Soc., vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 542–550,
1971.
[3] G. E. Garnett, “Modeling piano sound using digital waveg uide ﬁltering
techniques,” in Proc. Int. Computer Music Conf., Urbana, Illinois, USA,
1987, pp. 89–95.
[4] J. O. Smith and S. A. Van Duyne, “Commuted piano synthesis ,” in Proc.
Int. Computer Music Conf. , Banff, Canada, September 1995, pp. 335–
342, URL: http://ccrma.stanford.edu/∼jos/cs.html.
[5] S. A. Van Duyne and J. O. Smith, “Developments for
the commuted piano,” in Proc. Int. Computer Music
Conf., Banff, Canada, September 1995, pp. 319–326, URL:
http://ccrma.stanford.edu/∼jos/cs.html.
PUBLISHED IN IEEE TRANS. ON AUDIO, SPEECH, AND LANGUAGE PROC ESSING, VOL. 18, NO. 4, PP. 809–821, MAY 2010 13
[6] G. Borin, D. Rocchesso, and F. Scalcon, “A physical piano model for
music performance,” in Proc. Int. Computer Music Conf. , Thessaloniki,
Greece, Sep. 1997, pp. 350–353.
[7] B. Bank, “Physics-based sound synthesis of the piano,” M aster’s
thesis, Budapest University of Technology and Economics,
Hungary, May 2000, published as Report 54 of HUT
Laboratory of Acoustics and Audio Signal Processing, URL:
http://www.mit.bme.hu/∼bank/thesis.
[8] B. Bank, F. Avanzini, G. Borin, G. De Poli, F. Fontana, and D. Roc-
chesso, “Physically informed signal-processing methods for piano sound
synthesis: a research overview,”EURASIP J. on Applied Signal Process.,
vol. 2003, no. 10, pp. 941–952, Sep. 2003.
[9] J. Bensa, “Analysis and synthesis of piano sounds using
physical and signal models,” Ph.D. dissertation, Universi t´ e
de la M´ edit´ erran´ ee, Marseille, France, May 2003, URL:
http://www.lma.cnrs-mrs.fr/∼bensa.
[10] M. Aramaki, J. Bensa, L. Daudet, P. Guillemain, and R. Kr onland-
Martinet, “Resynthesis of coupled piano string vibrations based on
physical modeling,” Journal of New Music Research , vol. 30, no. 3,
pp. 213–226, 2002.
[11] J. Bensa, K. Jensen, and R. Kronland-Martinet, “A hybri d resynthesis
model for hammer–string interaction of piano tones,” EURASIP J. on
Applied Signal Process. , vol. 2004, no. 1, pp. 1021–1035, Jan. 2004.
[12] B. Bank and L. Sujbert, “Generation of longitudinal vib rations in piano
strings: From physics to sound synthesis,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 117,
no. 4, pp. 2268–2278, Apr. 2005, URL:http://www.mit.bme.hu/
∼bank/jasa-longitud.
[13] B. Bank, “Physics-based sound synthesis of string inst ruments in-
cluding geometric nonlinearities,” Ph.D. dissertation, B udapest Uni-
versity of Technology and Economics, Hungary, Feb. 2006, UR L:
http://www.mit.bme.hu/∼bank/phd.
[14] J. Rauhala, H. M. Lehtonen, and V . V¨ alim¨ aki, “Toward next-generation
digital keyboard instruments,”IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 24, no. 2,
pp. 12–20, Mar. 2007.
[15] J. Rauhala, M. Laurson, V . V¨ alim¨ aki, H.-M. Lehtonen, and V . Norilo,
“A parametric piano synthesizer,”Computer Music J., vol. 32, no. 4, pp.
17–30, Winter 2008.
[16] Modartt S.A.S., “Pianoteq True Modelling,” Ramonvill e, France, 2006,
URL: http://www.pianoteq.com/.
[17] Roland Corporation, “Roland V-Piano,” 2009, URL:
http://www.roland.com/products/en/V-Piano/.
[18] P. M. Morse, Vibration and Sound . McGraw-Hill, 1948, reprint, (1 st
ed. 1936).
[19] V . V¨ alim¨ aki, J. Pakarinen, C. Erkut, and M. Karjalain en, “Discrete-
time modelling of musical instruments,” Reports on Progress in Physics,
vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 1–78, Oct. 2006.
[20] A. Chaigne and A. Askenfelt, “Numerical simulations of piano strings.
I. A physical model for a struck string using ﬁnite differenc e methods,”
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. , vol. 95, no. 2, pp. 1112–1118, Feb. 1994.
[21] ——, “Numerical simulations of piano strings. II. Compa risons with
measurements and systematic exploration of some hammer-st ring para-
meters,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. , vol. 95, no. 3, pp. 1631–1640, Mar. 1994.
[22] N. Giordano and M. Jiang, “Physical modeling of the pian o,” EURASIP
J. on Applied Signal Process., vol. 2004, no. 7, pp. 926–933, June 2004.
[23] J. O. Smith, “Techniques for digital ﬁlter design and sy stem iden-
tiﬁcation with application to the violin,” Ph.D. dissertat ion, Stanford
University, California, USA, June 1983.
[24] ——, Physical Audio Signal Processing for Virtual Musical
Instruments and Audio Effects . USA: Center for Computer
Research in Music and Acoustics, Stanford University, W3K
Publishing, Aug. Accessed: July 2009., on-line book, URL:
http://ccrma.stanford.edu/∼jos/pasp.
[25] J.-M. Adrien, “The missing link: Modal synthesis,” in Representations
of Musical Signals , G. De Poli, A. Piccialli, and C. Roads, Eds.
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA: The MIT Press, 1991, pp. 269 –297.
[26] L. Trautmann and R. Rabenstein, Digital Sound Synthesis by Physical
Modeling using the Functional Transformation Method . New York,
USA: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, 2003.
[27] L. R. Rabiner and B. Gold, Theory and Application of Digital Signal
Processing. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, USA: Prentice-Hall, 1975.
[28] X. Boutillon, “Model for piano hammers: Experimental d etermination
and digital simulation,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 83, no. 2, pp. 746–754,
Feb. 1988.
[29] G. Borin, G. De Poli, and D. Rocchesso, “Elimination of d elay-free loops
in discrete-time models of nonlinear acoustic systems,” IEEE Trans.
Acoust. Speech Signal Process. , vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 597–606, Sep. 2000.
[30] A. Stulov, “Hysteretic model of the grand piano felt,” J. Acoust. Soc.
Am., vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 2577–2585, Apr. 1995.
[31] N. Giordano and J. P. Winans II, “Piano hammers and their compression
characteristics: Does a power law make sense?” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol.
107, no. 4, pp. 2248–2255, Apr. 2000.
[32] H. A. Conklin, “Design and tone in the mechanoacoustic p iano. Part III.
Piano strings and scale design,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. , vol. 100, no. 3, pp.
1286–1298, June 1996.
[33] I. Nakamura and D. Naganuma, “Characteristics of piano sound spectra,”
in Proc. Stockholm Music Acoust. Conf. , 1993, pp. 325–330.
[34] H. A. Conklin, “Generation of partials due to nonlinear mixing in a
stringed instrument,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. , vol. 105, no. 1, pp. 536–545,
Jan. 1999.
[35] A. Watzky, “On the generation of axial modes in the nonli near vibrations
of strings,” in Proc. Acoustics’08 Paris Conf., Paris, France, June 2008.
[36] J. Bensa and L. Daudet, “Efﬁcient modeling of ”phantom” partials in
piano tones,” in Int. Symp. on Musical Acoust. , Nara, Japan, Mar. 2004,
pp. 207–210.
[37] G. Weinreich, “Coupled piano strings,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. , vol. 62,
no. 6, pp. 1474–1484, Dec. 1977.
[38] M. Karjalainen, V . V¨ alim¨ aki, and T. Tolonen, “Plucked-string models:
from Karplus-Strong algorithm to digital waveguides and be yond,”
Computer Music J. , vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 17–32, 1998.
[39] J. O. Smith, “Efﬁcient synthesis of stringed musical in struments,” in
Proc. Int. Computer Music Conf. , Tokyo, Japan, Sep. 1993, pp. 64–71,
URL: http://ccrma.stanford.edu/∼jos/cs/cs.html.
[40] S. Zambon, H.-M. Lehtonen, and B. Bank, “Simulation of p iano sustain-
pedal effect by parallel second-order ﬁlters,” in Proc. Conf. on Digital
Audio Effects, Espoo, Finland, Sep. 2008, pp. 199–204.
[41] M. Karjalainen and J. O. Smith, “Body modeling techniqu es for string
instrument synthesis,” in Proc. Int. Computer Music Conf. , Hong Kong,
Aug. 1996, pp. 232–239.
[42] T. Paatero and M. Karjalainen, “Kautz ﬁlters and genera lized frequency
resolution: Theory and audio applications,” J. Audio Eng. Soc. , vol. 51,
no. 1–2, pp. 27–44, Jan./Feb. 2003.
[43] B. Bank, “Direct design of parallel second-order ﬁlter s for
instrument body modeling,” in Proc. Int. Computer Music
Conf., Copenhagen, Denmark, Aug. 2007, pp. 458–465, URL:
http://www.acoustics.hut.fi/go/icmc07-parfilt.
[44] V . Madisetti and D. Williams, The digital signal processing handbook .
CRC press, 1998.
[45] W. G., “Efﬁcient convolution without input–output del ay,”J. Audio Eng.
Soc., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 127–136, Nov. 1995.
[46] G. Garcia, “Optimal Filter Partition for Efﬁcient Conv olution with Short
Input Output Delay,” in Proc. 113th AES Conv., Preprint No. 5660, Los
Angeles, USA, 2002.
[47] M. Karjalainen and T. Paatero, “Equalization of loudsp eaker and
room responses using Kautz ﬁlters: Direct least squares des ign,”
EURASIP J. on Advances in Sign. Proc., Spec. Iss. on Spatial S ound
and Virtual Acoustics , vol. 2007, p. 13, 2007, article ID 60949,
doi:10.1155/2007/60949.
[48] G. Scavone, “RtAudio: A Cross-Platform C++ Class for Re altime Audio
Input/Output,” inProc. Int. Computer Music Conf., Gothenburg, Sweden,
Sep. 2002, pp. 196–199.
[49] R. Gerber, A. Bik, K. Smith, and X. Tian, The software optimization
cookbook. Intel press, 2002.
[50] M. Frigo and S. Johnson, “FFTW: An adaptive software arc hitecture for
the FFT,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech and Signal Process. ,
vol. III, Seattle, Washington, USA, May 1998, pp. 1381–1384 .