HELSINKI UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY
Department of Electrical and Communications Engineering
Laboratory of Acoustics and Audio Signal Processing
Heidi-Maria Lehtonen
Analysis and Parametric Synthesis of the Piano Sound
Master’s Thesis submitted in partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Science in Technology.
Espoo, November 29, 2005
Supervisor: Professor Vesa Välimäki
Instructor: M.Sc. Jukka Rauhala
HELSINKI UNIVERSITY ABSTRACT OF THE
OF TECHNOLOGY MASTER’STHESIS
Author: Heidi-Maria Lehtonen
Name of the thesis: Analysis and Parametric Synthesis of the Piano Sound
Date: Nov 29, 2005 Number of pages: 55
Department: Electrical and Communications Engineering
Professorship: S-89 Acoustics and Audio Signal Processing
Supervisor: Prof. Vesa Välimäki
Instructors: M.Sc. Jukka Rauhala
In this thesis, an overview of the sound production mechanism of the piano is given. The
acoustical properties of the instrument are studied in order to make a baseline for a physical
and parametric model for the piano. In addition, the most important features of the piano
sound, such as inharmonicity, the complicated decay process of the tones and the properties of
the soundboard and the pedals, are investigated. The differences between the grand piano and
the upright piano are considered in brief.
As the digital waveguide technique is the most feasible physics-based sound synthesis tech-
nique at the moment, the synthesis procedure that is followed in this thesis is based on this
technique. An overview of the main aspects of this synthesis scheme is given, and the most
important modeling issues are taken into account from the piano sound synthesis point of view.
A novel ﬁlter design technique for modeling the losses occurring in the piano sound is pre-
sented with some practical design examples. In addition, the modeling of the sustain pedal
is discussed and signal analysis is performed in order to gather information for the synthetic
sustain pedal algorithm. The analyzed signals are obtained from two recording sessions which
were carried out in two parts during the year 2005.
Keywords: digital ﬁlter design, digital signal processing, music, musical acoustics, piano, sig-
nal analysis, sound synthesis
i
TEKNILLINEN KORKEAKOULU DIPLOMITYÖN TIIVISTELMÄ
Tekijä: Heidi-Maria Lehtonen
Työn nimi: Pianon äänen analyysi ja parametrinen synteesi
Päivämäärä: 29.11.2005 Sivuja: 55
Osasto: Sähkö- ja tietoliikennetekniikka
Professuuri: S-89 Akustiikka ja äänenkäsittelytekniikka
Työn valvoja: Prof. Vesa Välimäki
Työn ohjaaja: DI Jukka Rauhala
Tässä työssä tutkitaan pianon äänentuottomekanismia sekä akustisia ominaisuuksia. Tarkoi-
tuksena on luoda lähtökohdat pianon äänen parametriselle mallintamiselle. Lisäksi tutkitaan
pianon äänen tärkeimpiä ominaisuuksia, kuten epäharmonisuutta, osaäänesten monimutkaista
vaimenemisprosessia, kaikupohjan ja pedaalin ominaisuuksia sekä näiden tekijöiden vaikutuk-
sia ääneen. Flyygelin ja pystypianon eroja tarkastellaan lyhyesti.
Koska digitaalinen aaltojohtomallinnus tarjoaa parhaat lähtökohdat fysikaaliseen soitinmallin-
nukseen, tämä työ pohjautuu tähän tekniikkaan. Digitaalisen aaltojohtomallinnuksen pääpiir-
teet esitellään, kuten myös pianon kannalta olennaisimmat mallinnukseen liittyvät asiat. Lisäksi
esitellään uusi tekniikka häviösuotimen suunnittelua varten, sekä annetaan muutama esimerk-
ki käytännön suodinsuunnittelusta tällä tekniikalla. Tämän lisäksi tarkastellaan kaikupedaalin
mallintamista sekä suoritetaan signaalianalyysi tehokkaan mallinnusalgoritmin löytämiseksi.
Analysoitavat signaalit on äänitetty kahdessa äänityssessiossa vuoden 2005 aikana.
Avainsanat: digitaalinen signaalinkäsittely, digitaalisuotimien suunnittelu, musiikki, musiik-
kiakustiikka, piano, signaalianalyysi, äänisynteesi
ii
Acknowledgements
This Master’s thesis has been carried out in the Laboratory of Acoustics and Audio Signal
Processing at Helsinki University of Technology during the year 2005. The work has been
funded by the Academy of Finland as a part of the CAPSAS project (project no. 104934).
My foremost thanks go to my supervisor, Professor Vesa Välimäki, whose encouragement
and many helpful comments have contributed signiﬁcantly to my whole working process.
Also, I want to thank my instructor M.Sc. Jukka Rauhala, who has given me many valuable
advises during this work.
I wish to thank my colleagues at the Akulab, who have created a pleasant working environ-
ment. Especially, I would like to thank M.Sc. Henri Penttinen for providing me informa-
tion about recording techniques, Mr. Antti Huovilainen for helping me with coding-related
problems and Mr. Jussi Pekonen for helping me to carry out the recordings. I would also
like to thank Mrs. Lea Söderman for taking care of all practical issues.
Finally, I would like to thank my family for their love and prayers. My father, Professor
Pentti Huovinen, has encouraged me to believe in myself and in my dreams. My mother, Dr.
Saara Huovinen, has supported me in every aspects of my life during this whole process.
My brother Ville and sister Elisa, thank you for your encouragement. I would also like to
thank my parents-in-law for their support.
Last, but deﬁnitely not least, I would like to thank my dear husband Hannu. Thank you for
your patience and love during the good and especially the hard times.
Otaniemi, November 29, 2005
Heidi-Maria Lehtonen
iii
Contents
Abbreviations vi
List of Figures vii
1 Introduction 1
2 Overview of the Piano 3
2.1 Keyboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2.2 Action and the Hammer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.3 Piano Strings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.3.1 Inharmonicity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.3.2 Sound Decay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.4 The Soundboard and the Frame . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2.4.1 Pedals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
2.5 Grand Piano vs. Upright Piano . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5.1 Structural Properties of the Upright Piano . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5.2 Is There Noticeable Difference Between the Sounds of the Two In-
struments? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
2.6 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3 Digital Waveguide Modeling of the Piano 13
3.1 A Short Overview of Synthesis Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.1.1 Abstract Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
iv
3.1.2 Processed Recordings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.1.3 Spectral Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.1.4 Physics-based Modeling Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2 Digital Waveguide Modeling of the Piano . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2.1 Modeling the String . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2.2 Modeling the Hammer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2.3 Modeling the Soundboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4 A Novel Loss Filter Design Technique 22
4.1 Equalizer Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.2 Anti-Imaging Filter Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.3 Multi-Ripple Filter Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.4 Design Example: Perfect Match of 50 Partials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.5 Design Example: Low Order Sparse FIR Filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.6 Results and Comparisons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.7 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5 Modeling of the Sustain Pedal 30
5.1 Overview of Prior Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.1.1 The Sustain Pedal Effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.1.2 Studies Concerning the Modeling of the Sustain Pedal . . . . . . . 31
5.2 Reverberator Algorithm for Sustain Pedal Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.2.1 Signal Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.2.2 Algorithm for Modeling the Sustain Pedal Effect . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.2.3 Results and Analysis of the Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.3 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6 Conclusions and Future Directions 42
A Recordings 50
v
Abbreviations
DFT Discrete Fourier Transform
FDN Feedback Delay Network
FFT Fast Fourier Transform
FIR Finite Impulse Response
FM Frequency Modulation
IFFT Inverse Fast Fourier Transform
IFIR Interpolated Finite Impulse Response
IIR Inﬁnite Impulse Response
KS Karplus-Strong
LPC Linear Predictive Coding
VCO Voltage Controlled Oscillator
vi
List of Figures
2.1 A grand piano. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2.2 An upright piano. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2.3 The general structure of a grand piano. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
3.1 Two parallel delay lines for simulating two propagating waves. . . . . . . . 16
4.1 The block diagram of the

th-order loss ﬁlter. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2 The magnitude responses of the subﬁlters presented in Fig. 4.1. . . . . . . . 24
4.3 The magnitude response and the reverberation times of the loss ﬁlter. . . . . 27
4.4 Comparison of different loss ﬁlters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.1 3D plot of the string register response, the key index is 4. . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.2 3D plot of the string register response, the key index is 40. . . . . . . . . . 33
5.3 3D plot of the string register response, the key index is 76. . . . . . . . . . 34
5.4 The energies of the string register responses with and without the sustain
pedal. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.5 The envelopes of the harmonics 2-7 of the tone C1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.6 The envelopes of the harmonics 1-6 of the tone C4. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.7 The envelopes of the harmonics 1-2 of the tone C7. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.8 The block diagram of the sustain pedal algorithm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
A.1 Microphone positioning, grand piano. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
A.2 Microphone positioning, upright piano. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
A.3 Recording the soundboard response. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
vii
Chapter 1
Introduction
In this thesis, the aim is to analyze the piano sound and study the modeling of the instrument.
The piano is one of the most widely used instrument in the western music. Moreover, the
word piano covers actually two separate instruments, the grand piano and the upright piano.
They both are extremely complex from the physical point of view. This fact makes the
modeling task fascinating and challenging. The acoustics of the grand piano and the upright
piano have been an interesting research topic over decades, but despite the dozens of studies
the behavior of the instruments are anything but clear. An overview to the acoustics of the
grand piano is given in Chapter 2. This analysis can be applied mostly to the upright piano
as well.
An acoustical piano may not be suitable choice for all situations and for all pianists. For
example, a digital piano may be a better solution for those who live in apartment houses,
as the digital instrument does not cause structural noise, which travels from one apartment
to another. At the moment, most of the digital pianos use the sampling technique, in which
recorded piano tones are played back from the database. The advantage is that the sounds of
high-quality digital pianos are authentic and the computational requirements are not signif-
icant. On the other hand, the need for memory is heavy, since all tones must be saved in the
database with several different dynamic levels. Also, some features of the piano sound, such
as the coupling between the played tones, cannot be modeled correctly, since the tones are
simply played back separately from each other. These facts give a fruitful starting point to
the development of a parametric piano synthesis model where the basis lies on the physics
of the instrument. In addition, if the implementation of the model is done in a computation-
ally efﬁcient way, physics-based sound synthesis can provide a good alternative for digital
pianos using the sampling technique. At the moment, the digital waveguide modeling has
turned out to be the most feasible physical sound synthesis technique for plucked and struck
string instrument modeling. It simulates the traveling wave solution of the wave equation
1
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 2
and provides a computationally efﬁcient solution for the real-time implementation. The
digital waveguide modeling of the piano is studied in Chapter 3.
The piano has a very characteristic sound. The features of the piano sound must be taken
into account in the modeling procedure. Parametric modeling provides a good baseline
for a physical model, as the parameters can be extracted from recorded piano tones and
studied by means of different signal analysis tools. These parameters are used to control
the physical model, which imitates the sound production mechanism of the piano. The
main features of the piano tones are inharmonicity, which comes from the stiffness of the
piano strings, and complicated decay of the tones, which basically comes from the energy
leakage into the soundboard and other energy losses. A novel loss ﬁlter design technique
for modeling the decay of the tonesis presented in Chapter 4.
In addition to the string model, models for soundboard and sustain pedal are needed in a
high-quality parametric piano. Despite their importance, these are the least-studied parts of
the acoustic piano. Especially, only few models for the sustain pedal have been presented in
literature. An overview of the sustain pedal effect is given in Chapter 5, and a reverberator
algorithm is presented for modeling the effect.
Despite the fact that the piano has been studied by a number of researchers, the work
is by no means completed. It is curious that this instrument is very popular and known
widely around the world, but the physics of the instrument still remain partially unknown.
This affects also the modeling work. In order to make reliable physical sound synthesis,
the key assumption is that the physics of the instruments are known, at least at some level.
Moreover, the operation of human auditory system in the piano sound perception should
be known better in order to make the synthesis model more efﬁcient. This is a part of the
future work, which is discussed in Chapter 6. This chapter also concludes the work.
Chapter 2
Overview of the Piano
The piano is probably the most popular instrument used in the western music. It has a very
characteristic sound and a wide dynamic range, and its playing range is more than seven
octaves. Usually the piano is used as a solo instrument but often it is used to accompany
other solo instruments or singing. Its popularity probably arises from its versatility and the
fact that it is capable of producing both powerful and sensitive sounds. Also, the control of
the sound production mechanism is relatively easy, as there are only three different control
parameters: The number of the key, the velocity of the press, and the pedals.
The roots of the modern piano go back into the beginning of the 18th century (Fletcher
and Rossing, 1991). In 1709, Bartolomeo Christofori of Florence modiﬁed the harpsichord
in order to make the instrument capable of variations in tone. He replaced the jacks with
hammers and called the new instrument the “gravicembalo col piano et forte”. During three
centuries, the instrument has evolved into two distinct instruments, the grand piano and
the upright piano. In Fig. 2.1 a Steinway & Sons grand piano is shown and in Fig. 2.2 a
Yamaha upright piano is presented. The pictures were taken in Espoo Music School during
the recording session in February 2005. For more information about the recordings, see
Appendix A.
The grand piano consists of ﬁve main parts, the keyboard, the action, the strings, the
soundboard, and the frame (Fletcher and Rossing, 1991). The keyboard consists of 88 keys
of which 52 are white and 36 are black. From the keystroke the information message is
transmitted to the action, which controls the hammer. The hammer hits the string and sets
it into vibration. The kinetic energy of the hammer is transformed into vibrational energy,
which is stored into the normal modes of the string. This energy is transmitted into the
soundboard via the bridge. The soundboard is a thin, wooden plate positioned under the
frame. The cast-iron frame, positioned to the upper part of the wooden case, keeps the
instrument together, and it is designed to withstand the high tension of the strings. The
3
CHAPTER 2. OVERVIEW OF THE PIANO 4
Figure 2.1: A grand piano.
Figure 2.2: An upright piano.
strings are attached to the tuning pins at the player end and to the hitch-pin rail at the other
end. The general structure of the instrument is presented in Fig. 2.3.
2.1 Keyboard
The player controls the output sound mainly with the keyboard. The choice of the key
determines the pitch of the tone, whereas the velocity of the ﬁnger press determines the
loudness. This interaction between the keyboard and the player is of great importance in
CHAPTER 2. OVERVIEW OF THE PIANO 5
Key

Jack

Hammer
Pin block

Damper

Soundboard

Ribs

String
 Bridge

Hitch pin

Joint hinge

Figure 2.3: The general structure of a grand piano.
the piano performance. Obviously, it is important that the feedback from the instrument to
the player is homogenous throughout the whole keyboard. The needed force for the key
depress should be the same for all keys. At the same time the “touch weight” should not
feel too light or too heavy to the pianist.
The “touch of the pianist” is a concept that divides the physicists’and pianists’opinions.
Physicists claim that the resulting sound does not depend on anything else than the velocity
of the ﬁnger press. On the other hand, many skilled pianists have the opinion that the
“touch” is an important factor in the art of piano music. By applying different kinds of
touches, the pianist can have major inﬂuence on the shadings of the music. It should be
pointed out that Askenfelt and Jansson (1990) have found out that at least the key motion
depends on the touch: The performance of the action is different depending on the playing
style, e.g., staccato and legato.
2.2 Action and the Hammer
The highly complicated machinery of the piano is called the action. This true specimen
of skill is responsible for transmitting the players intentions and accounts from the control
mechanism of the instrument to the strings. The most important part of the action is the
interaction between the hammer and the strings. Fig. 2.3 illustrates the principal idea of the
action and in the following, its operation is presented in general level. More comprehensive
studies can be found in (Askenfelt and Jansson, 1990) and in (Fletcher and Rossing, 1991).
Askenfelt and Jansson (1990) divided the piano action in four major parts: The key, the
lever body, the hammer, and the damper. When the key is depressed, the damper lying on
the string is lifted up. Right after this, the lever body is rotated upwards and the hammer
is accelerated when the jack pushes the roller positioned under the hammer. Just before the
hammer strikes the string, the jack reaches the escapement dolly and the top of the jack is
moved away from the hammer roller. The hammer continues the rest of its journey to the
string freely.
CHAPTER 2. OVERVIEW OF THE PIANO 6
After the hammer strike, the rebounding hammer falls down and it is captured by the
check. This way the hammer is prevented from striking the string a second time, and the
action is now ready for repetition. If the key is held down after the hammer-string interac-
tion, the action will remain in this state. If the key is released right after the hammer stroke,
the action will return to its rest position.
The hammers have a strong effect on the tone quality. Their material, strength and size
contribute to the loudness as well as to the playability. The hammers are covered with two
layers of wool felt stretched over wooden moldings. The harder the felt material, the louder
and brighter the sound. In order to keep the loudness uniform throughout the scale, the
treble hammers must be harder than the bass hammers.
In modern instruments, the size and mass of the hammers decrease from bass to treble in
order to optimize the relation between aforementioned properties. If the hammer is heavy,
its contact time with the string increases. This, in turn, may increase losses in the case
that the roundtrip travel time for the initial pulse becomes shorter than the hammer-string
interaction time.
More information related to piano hammers and research dealing with hammers can be
found e.g. in (Conklin, 1990) and in (Conklin, 1996a).
2.3 Piano Strings
The strings are often called the heart of the piano. A concert grand piano has 243 steel-
made strings. The lowest strings are long and massive (length of even 2 m) while the
highest strings are thin and short. At the treble end, the length of the strings is only about
5 cm. At the bass end, the lowest strings overlap the middle strings providing them to get
nearer to the soundboard. The strings are terminated at the tuning pins at the player end and
at the hitch pin at the far end. The pins are made of steel and have a diameter from 3 to 4
mm. The speaking length of the string, though, is restricted to the bridge, see Fig. 2.3.
The ﬁrst eight strings are single strings and the rest of the strings corresponding to the 80
highest keys are in groups of two or three strings, depending on the instrument. The strings
corresponding to the lowest 20 keys are wrapped with one or two layers of wire and the
rest 68 sets of three strings are unwrapped. Wrapping makes the bass string more ﬂexible
compared to a solid string of the same diameter, which is advantageous since solid strings
with the same diameter and mass would result in highly inharmonic sound (Fletcher and
Rossing, 1991).
CHAPTER 2. OVERVIEW OF THE PIANO 7
2.3.1 Inharmonicity
The inharmonicity in the piano strings is caused by stiffness. It makes the higher partials
travel faster on the piano string, which means that their frequencies are a little higher com-
pared to those of an ideal string. In the spectrum, the partial components are slightly shifted
making the series of overtones “stretched” upwards.
A mathematic expression for a stiff string can be obtained when the wave equation is
formulated as a combination of the equations for an ideal string and an ideal bar, see e.g.
(Smith III, 2004). Solving this equation for small stiffness values, a relation between the
modal frequencies and inharmonicity coefﬁcient B can be solved. A more comprehensive
study on the mathematical derivation of this relation is given in section 3.2.1.
The inharmonicity coefﬁcient of a tone can be measured, although it is far from being
an easy task. Galembo and Askenfelt (1999) presented a method which estimates the fun-
damental frequency and the inharmonicity coefﬁcient at the same time. With this method
they reached convincing results, although the fundamental frequency estimation problem is
known to be challenging as well.
Usually, strong inharmonicity is considered to be an undesired feature of the piano sound.
On the other hand, it is not desired to get totally rid of it, since a slight inharmonicity adds
warmth to the sound (Fletcher et al., 1962). Interestingly, it has been shown that the human
ear is more sensitive to inharmonicity when the fundamental frequency of the tone is low
(Järveläinen et al., 2001). In this light, it is reasonable to use wrapped strings at the bass
range of the piano. Although the treble strings are highly dispersive, they contain only a
few partial components on the audio range. Therefore it is not necessary to eliminate the
effects caused by inharmonicity by using wound strings at the treble end of the piano.
The inharmonicity is taken into account in the tuning process (Fletcher and Rossing,
1991). The tuning is usually done in a way that the beating between the notes is minimized.
This will result in a stretched scale, where the fact that the upper partials of the lower tones
are slightly sharp with respect to the upper tones, is compensated. In other words, the lowest
strings are undertuned and the highest strings are overtuned.
2.3.2 Sound Decay
The sound generated by the piano strings is very complicated. The sound builds up rapidly
and decays slowly. Moreover, partials decay at different rates. Some of the partials may
sound even dozens of seconds whereas other partials decay in a few seconds. The spectrum
varies over time and differs from key to key; at the bass end over 50 partials can be extracted
while at the treble end the corresponding number is only about 3 or 4. As the strings
preserve most of the energy transmitted by the hammer and the action, the decay rate of the
CHAPTER 2. OVERVIEW OF THE PIANO 8
tone depends on how rapidly the energy is leaking out from the strings.
The decay rate of the piano tone is twofold: The tone begins to decay rapidly, but after
some milliseconds the decay rate changes and becomes slower. As stated by Weinreich
(1977), the amount of aftersound, that is, the portion of the “slow” decay, depends on the
degree of mistuning. He also pointed out that the hammer irregularities may have an effect
on the two-stage decay as one string of the string group can be hit harder than another. There
is yet another explanation to the two stage decay: Change in the predominant vibration of
the strings. The vertical (perpendicular to the soundboard) vibration decays rapidly whereas
the horizontal (parallel to the soundboard) vibration decays slowly (Weinreich, 1977).
Other important phenomenon in the piano sound is the beating, which results from unison
groups of strings. When the hammer excites a tricord, that is, a set of three unison strings,
the strings begin to vibrate in the same phase. Due to small differences in frequency be-
tween the strings in the tricord, the tone starts to beat soon. The strings can be by no means
considered to be independent, since they are coupled to the bridge. This coupling allows
energy leakage between the strings resulting in a highly complicated system. A comprehen-
sive study about coupling of two strings and the bridge admittance is given in (Weinreich,
1977).
2.4 The Soundboard and the Frame
The soundboard is the main radiating structure of the piano. Usually it is made of spruce
strips which are glued together edge-to-edge. Widely used spruce species are Sitka spruce
or red spruce. Young’s modulus, as well as the strength, varies from tree to tree. These
values are much smaller in a direction at 90 degrees to the grain than in the grain direction.
This difference in cross-gain stiffness is compensated with ribs, which are glued onto the
bottom of the grand piano soundboard. In upright pianos, the ribs are glued onto the back
of the soundboard. Conklin (1996b) stated that an unribbed solid spruce soundboard would
cause splitting of the soundboard due to stresses caused by ambient factors, like changes in
humidity and temperature. He also stated that the output of the instrument would be less
than normal if there were no ribs on the soundboard.
The behavior of the soundboard can be examined with different kinds of methods. One
of the most popular is the Chladni method (Conklin, 1996b), which gives visual results, but
other powerful methods also exist. In addition, it is possible to investigate the vibrational
behavior of the soundboard by numerical analysis, like the ﬁnite element method. This
kind of approach was taken among others by Berthaut et al. (2003). The advantage of
computer simulation is that a prototype model of a soundboard need not be constructed, on
the understanding that the material parameters and the exact dimensions of the soundboard
CHAPTER 2. OVERVIEW OF THE PIANO 9
are known.
The bridge couples the strings to the soundboard. Modern pianos have generally two
bridges, one for the bass strings and another for the middle and treble strings. Usually the
bridges are made of hardwood instead of softwood (like the spruce) which is unsuitable for
bridge material due to its low density. Too low a density allows extra losses at the string-
terminating points. Also, the strength of the softwood is inadequate to resist the mechanical
stresses around the metal bridge pins, where the strings are terminated. If the strings were
terminated straight to the soundboard, the resulting sound would be louder but unpleasant
and the decay times of the tones would be too short (Conklin, 1996b). Thus, the existence
and the quality of the bridge affects the piano sound remarkably.
Since the mechanical impedance of the soundboard is greater than the mechanical
impedance of the strings, the energy is leaking very slowly to the soundboard. An impor-
tant parameter which affects the leaking rate is the driving-point impedance, which varies
with frequency. The exact values can be determined by measurements. Logical places to
measure impedances are in several places on the bridges.
In the late 1800s, cast iron frames replaced the wooden string plates. This renewal en-
abled the increase of the acoustical output and extension of the keyboard. At the same time,
the quality of the piano sound improved. The cast iron plate provides proper strength to
support the high tension of the strings (which can exceed 1000 N!) as well as sufﬁcient
stability (Fletcher and Rossing, 1991). Also the tunability improved as the tension of one
single string became almost independent of the tension of the other strings.
The cast iron frame is not a good tone radiator. Due to this fact, the string energy dissi-
pation within should be prevented. The plate should not vibrate during the playing and the
mechanical impedance of the plate should be substantially higher than that of the strings.
2.4.1 Pedals
The use of the pedals was not marked in musical notes before the 1790s. In the beginning,
it was considered gimmicky, but soon in the 19th century composers like Chopin and Liszt
took advantage of the modern technique and employed the usage of the pedals actively in
their work (Trustees of Dartmouth College, 2004).
With the help of the pedals, the player can add variation to the tones. Modern pianos
have either two or three pedals. The right pedal is always the sustain pedal, which lifts all
the dampers and sets all strings into vibration due to sympathetic resonance and the energy
transmission via the bridge. The sound rings as long as the sustain pedal is held down,
regardless of whether the key is released or not.
The left pedal is called the una corda pedal and its purpose is to make the output sound
softer. Una corda is Italian and means “one string”. In grand pianos, the whole keyboard
CHAPTER 2. OVERVIEW OF THE PIANO 10
is shifted right causing the hammer to strike only one string instead of two, or two strings
instead of three. In addition to the decrease in loudness, the una corda pedal affects the
timbre as the coupling between the strings does not remain the same (Weinreich, 1977). On
the upright piano, the una corda pedal moves the action closer to the strings.
The purpose of the third pedal, which is positioned between the una corda and the sustain
pedal, can vary depending on the instrument. In some instruments, the center pedal can
work as a bass sustain. In this case, depressing the middle pedal sustains only the notes
in the bass section. In most grand pianos, the middle pedal is a “sostenuto” pedal which
sustains only the notes played before the pedal is depressed. This effect gives impression
of a third hand, because the player can employ both of his or her hands to the playing while
the sostenuto pedal keeps the chosen notes ringing. In some upright pianos, the center pedal
is a practice pedal. The tone is softened with a piece of felt which is lowered between the
hammers and the strings. (Piano World, 2005; Fletcher and Rossing, 1991)
2.5 Grand Piano vs. Upright Piano
A question that has long exercised the minds of researchers is whether there is audible
difference between the grand piano and the upright piano. It is clear that the structures
and mechanisms between these two instruments are different, but how these differences
correspond to the sounds of the instruments is still far from being completely obvious. In
the following, the structural differences are investigated and some aspects on the distinction
are given.
2.5.1 Structural Properties of the Upright Piano
Like grand pianos, there exist upright pianos of several sizes. The largest upright pianos
stand 150 cm in height whereas some studio uprights are only 100 cm of height. In large
upright pianos, the action is positioned some distance above the keyboard and in small
uprights the action is partly or even completely below the keyboard.
The major difference in the upright piano action compared to the grand piano is that
the hammers and the dampers move horizontally. The repetition lever, which enables fast
repetitions in grand pianos, is absent from the upright piano action. This means that the key
must be returned to its rest position before it can be depressed again. This is a clear feature
that most pianists recognize; it may affect also the prevailing opinion among musicians that
the grand piano is better than the upright piano. (Fletcher and Rossing, 1991)
The soundboard of an upright piano is rectangular. However, the vibrational area of
the soundboard is trapezoidal, because of the trimming rims that are positioned in the two
opposite corners of the soundboard. The two bridges lay diagonally on the soundboard,
CHAPTER 2. OVERVIEW OF THE PIANO 11
inside the vibrational area.
2.5.2 Is There Noticeable Difference Between the Sounds of the Two Instru-
ments?
A few studies exist about the distinction of the two instruments. Wogram and Mori (2003)
have listed the main properties of pianos with respect to their musical acoustical qualities.
They have measured these parameters with subjective listening tests and resulted in several
interesting observations. They used single tones, sequences of single tones, chords and
musical pieces in their listening tests, but found out that the sounds of upright and grand
pianos can only be distinguished reliably when musical pieces are played.
Probably the most interesting result is that according to their tests the two instruments
cannot be distinguished by the inharmonicity. This is surprising since usually the upright
piano is considered to have a more inharmonic sound than the grand piano as the strings
are, in general, shorter than in the grand piano. In the test, the subjects found the differences
in inharmonicity between the three strings of a choir in a grand piano greater than between
one upright piano string and the grand piano strings!
A more intuitive result concerns the sound radiation. Because of the different positions of
the soundboards of the two instruments, the listener perceives the sound ﬁelds in a different
way. It turns out that in the case of a grand piano there is a better balance between the bass
and treble sounds whereas in the case of an upright piano the bass seems to dominate the
sound. Another factor that affects the perceived sound balance is the eigenmode density of
the soundboard. In the case of the grand piano with higher eigenmode density, the sound is
better balanced.
As already mentioned, the piano action plays a key role in the distinction of the two
instruments for the player. Wogram and Mori (2003) found out that besides the ability
for faster repetition, the grand piano also has more efﬁcient dampers. In the upright piano
action, the dampers are positioned beside the spot of attack, which results in insufﬁcient
damping of some sound components. In grand pianos, the dampers are positioned in a
better way, and all modes will be damped properly.
2.6 Conclusion
In this chapter, an overview of the piano was given. This overview is by no means all-
inclusive, but rather a compact glance at the structure and acoustics of the piano. As it can
be noticed, the instrument is remarkably complex, but simple to control. This makes the
modeling task attractive and challenging at the same time. It is also clear that perceptual
issues can facilitate the modeling problem since there is no sense to model features that
CHAPTER 2. OVERVIEW OF THE PIANO 12
exist but are not perceptually signiﬁcant. This fact calls for reliable investigations on the
human perception and auditory system.
It is also worth noticing that the grand piano and the upright piano are two distinct instru-
ments. Although they sound similar to many people, their structures and sound production
mechanisms are different. Especially, skilled piano players and musicians distinguish the
instruments by both sound and the response of the instrument.
Chapter 3
Digital Waveguide Modeling of the
Piano
This chapter is divided into two major sections. In the beginning, a short overview of
synthesis methods is given. Since the digital waveguide (DWG) modeling technique is the
most important from the viewpoint of this thesis, it is presented in a more extensive way.
The second part concerns the digital waveguide modeling of the piano.
3.1 A Short Overview of Synthesis Methods
Smith (1991) proposed a taxonomy which divides the sound synthesis methods into four
different main classes: Abstract algorithms, processed recordings (and sampling), spectral
models and physical models. According to Tolonen et al. (1998), the last two methods
mentioned are the most promising when it comes to the future of sound synthesis. How-
ever, the two aforementioned methods give important basis to new, elaborate methods. For
a more comprehensive overview of synthesis methods, see references (Roads, 1995) and
(Tolonen et al., 1998). In the latter reference, also comparison between synthesis methods
is performed.
3.1.1 Abstract Algorithms
Synthesis methods that produce sounds based on some ad hoc mathematical formula are
considered to belong to the class of abstract algorithms. The most important synthesis meth-
ods belonging to this class are frequency modulation (FM) synthesis (Chowning, 1973),
waveshaping synthesis (Arﬁb, 1979; Le Brun, 1979) and synthesis based on the Karplus-
Strong (KS) algorithm (Karplus and Strong, 1983).
In general, with these methods it is almost impossible to produce natural sounds that
13
CHAPTER 3. DIGITAL WAVEGUIDE MODELING OF THE PIANO 14
resemble real instruments. On the other hand, the KS algorithm gives an important back-
ground to some physical sound synthesis methods (Smith, 1983; Jaffe and Smith, 1983).
3.1.2 Processed Recordings
Processing of recorded sounds (also called the sampling technique or wavetable synthesis),
is a sound synthesis technique in which sounds are played back from recordings (Roads,
1995). Its advantages are its rather easy implementation and the fact that this technique
offers a great variation of possibilities in terms of sound modiﬁcations. On the other hand,
the drawback is that the amount of memory required for implementation is huge. At the
moment, the best piano synthesizers are based on the sampling technique.
3.1.3 Spectral Models
Spectral models try to model and imitate the properties of sound waves. Well known meth-
ods of this class are, for example, additive synthesis, which is one of the oldest synthesis
methods, the phase vocoder (Flanagan and Golden, 1966) and the source-ﬁlter synthesis,
which is widely used especially in the area of speech synthesis (Moorer, 1985).
3.1.4 Physics-based Modeling Techniques
In the ﬁeld of the sound synthesis of musical instruments, physical modeling is probably
the most widely used method at the moment. The strength of physical modeling is that it
provides intuitive approach to the control of the instrument models. The idea is to simulate
the sound production mechanism of the instrument instead of the sound itself. Physical
modeling techniques can be divided into six categories: Numerical solving of partial differ-
ential equations, source-ﬁlter modeling, vibrating mass-spring networks, modal synthesis,
wave digital ﬁlters and digital waveguide synthesis (Välimäki et al., 2006).
Numerical solving of the wave equation gives base to the ﬁnite difference method. This
approach was ﬁrst taken by Hiller and Ruiz (1971a,b). This method is extensively used in
the ﬁeld of sound synthesis of musical instruments. Its drawback compared to the digital
waveguide technique is that its computational complexity grows heavily with the size and
complexity of the model.
The source-ﬁlter synthesis mentioned in Section 3.1.3, can be included to the category of
physical models as well, because it models the sound source rather than the sound itself. The
vibrating mass-spring systems are based on the idea of modeling the mechanical elements
of a vibrating system, such as masses, dampers and springs. The idea was ﬁrst presented by
Cadoz et al. (1983).
CHAPTER 3. DIGITAL WAVEGUIDE MODELING OF THE PIANO 15
The idea of modal synthesis is that any system that produces sound can be divided into
vibrating substructures deﬁned by modal data (Adrien, 1991). The energy ﬂows between
the substructures via couplings and the system can also respond to external excitations. The
advantage of the method is that it can be applied to very complex structures.
Wave digital ﬁlters are initially developed for discrete-time simulation of analog electric
circuits. They are especially well suited for wave-based mass-spring modeling. This tech-
nique complements the DWG technique, as the nonlinearities in the instrument models can
be modeled with wave digital ﬁlters. The DWG technique is used for the wave propagation
part of the model. This technique was ﬁrst presented by Fettweis (1986).
The DWG synthesis technique has turned out to be the most efﬁcient and feasible when
it comes to the modeling of musical instrument sounds. The technique is especially well
suited e.g. to the simulation of a vibrating string or an acoustic tube. The theory is mainly
developed by Smith (1983, 1992, 1997). Also, in (Karjalainen et al., 1998) a very nice
introduction to the topic is given, in addition to some extensions. The idea of this method
originates from discretization of the traveling-wave solution of the wave equation. From this
point of view, the DWG modeling has the same starting point as the ﬁnite difference method.
However, it has certain advantages over the ﬁnite difference technique. For example, the
losses and the dispersion of the model can be lumped in one point, which means, in turn
that the whole system can be described with delay lines and linear ﬁlters.
In the following, the theory of DWG method is presented as a part of the piano string
model presentation as it describes the mathematical background for the method sufﬁciently.
3.2 Digital Waveguide Modeling of the Piano
Several DWG piano models can be found in literature. The ﬁrst one was presented by
Garnett (1987). Later, in 1995, Smith and Van Duyne presented a piano model (Smith and
Van Duyne, 1995; Van Duyne and Smith, 1995) based on commuted synthesis. A more
recent study on DWG piano modeling was given by Bank (2000b). A good overview of
prior research and extensions to the above-mentioned model was presented by Bank et al.
(2003). A very detailed piano model partially based on DWG modeling was presented by
Bensa (2003) and Bensa et al. (2003).
3.2.1 Modeling the String
The approach taken here follows the DWG modeling scheme starting from the time-domain
solution of the wave equation. The one-dimensional wave equation for an ideal string can
be written (Morse and Ingard, 1968)
CHAPTER 3. DIGITAL WAVEGUIDE MODELING OF THE PIANO 16




	



(3.1)
where  is the position along the string,  is the transversal displacement,  is time,

stands
for string tension and
	
is linear mass density of the string.
The wave equation can be interpreted as the Newton’s second law, 



, where  is
force,


stands for mass and

for acceleration. In the case of an ideal string, the force is
given as a product of the string tension and the curvature of the string, and the right side of
the equation is the mass density times transverse acceleration. The traveling-wave solution
of the wave equation can be written as a superposition of two waves, one traveling to the
right and the other traveling to the left:


 !#"
%$
"&!' (3.2)
where


is the right-going wave and

$
is the left-going wave. It is assumed that both


and

$
are twice differentiable functions. Their shape can be arbitrary.
The traveling-wave solution in Eq. 3.2 can be discretized by sampling the amplitudes of
the traveling waves at every

seconds. This corresponds to the spatial sampling interval
(
, which is the distance the wave propagates in

seconds, that is
(*)


, where  is
the sound velocity. Since one spatial unit corresponds to one temporal unit and the whole
wave propagates through the whole string, the wave propagating either right or left can be
simulated with a single digital delay line. Respectively, both waves can be simulated with
two parallel delay lines, see Fig. 3.1. This digital waveguide model of an ideal string can
be written as
,+-/.0



1


"&
$
12"


'3 (3.3)
In Eq. 3.3, the following changes of variables are made compared to Eq. 3.2: 546
.



(
and 7489+

1

. Also,

is suppressed since it multiplies all arguments.
y
+
(
nT
,0)

y
-
(
nT
,0)

z
-
M

y
+
((
n
-
M
)
T
,
MX
)

y
-
((
n+
M
)
T
,
MX
)

y
(
n
T
,
m
X
)
y
(
n
T
,0
)

z
-
M

Figure 3.1: Two parallel delay lines for simulating two propagating waves.
CHAPTER 3. DIGITAL WAVEGUIDE MODELING OF THE PIANO 17
The simulation made with a digital waveguide model is exact only at the sampling in-
stants. However, it is possible to model a continuous waveform by interpolation between
two adjacent points. Also, with the choice of the sampling period it is possible to contribute
to the precision of the simulation. In general, the theoretical lower limit to the sampling
frequency is twice the highest frequency occurring in the system. Equivalently, the waves
propagating along the string must be bandlimited. Otherwise aliasing would occur and the
reconstruction of the signal becomes impossible. This restriction is called the Nyquist con-
dition, see e.g. Oppenheim and Schafer (1975), p. 29. In CD-quality audio, the sampling
rate is 44.1 kHz.
It should be pointed out that so far only a one dimensional case is studied. In piano syn-
thesis, at least three dimensions should be taken into account. That is, the two transversal
vibration polarization, the horizontal and the vertical, and the third corresponds to longitudi-
nal waves. Actually, when the hammer strikes three strings instead of one, nine waveguides
per key should be included. However, this kind of approach is usually unnecessary, since
the result is sufﬁcient with one waveguide per coupled string (Bensa, 2003).
Modeling the Losses
In an ideal string, the string terminations are assumed to be rigid. This means that the waves
reﬂect with the same amplitude; the force waves change their sign and the velocity waves
reﬂect with the same sign. This is not the case with real piano strings, since losses occur due
to energy transmission to the bridge and soundboard. Also sympathetic resonance between
the strings causes energy losses, as well as the drag by the surrounding air. These losses
have to be modeled in high-quality piano synthesis. This is traditionally done by inserting
a loss ﬁlter to the string model (Van Duyne and Smith, 1995; Bank and Välimäki, 2003).
Basically, the loss ﬁlter can reduce to one loop attenuation factor when all frequencies
are decaying at the same rate. However, this is not the case with real strings, since high
partials tend to decay more rapidly than lower ones. Moreover, the variations in the gain
speciﬁcation between two adjacent partials can be signiﬁcant. The desired gain values can
be determined from a real piano sound, since the relation between the decay time constant of
the  th partial and the corresponding ﬁlter gain value  can be expressed as a closed-form
formula:


	


 (3.4)
where

is the fundamental frequency, and  is the decay time constant.
Van Duyne and Smith (1995) proposed a lowpass ﬁlter to be used as a loss ﬁlter. This
lowpass ﬁlter is a part of a coupling ﬁlter, which also takes into account the coupling be-
CHAPTER 3. DIGITAL WAVEGUIDE MODELING OF THE PIANO 18
tween the three strings of a tricord. This approach is simpliﬁed but efﬁcient way of model-
ing the overall losses and coupling between the strings. The problem in the model is that it
does not take the variation in the gain speciﬁcation into account.
Bank (2000b) presented a transformation method for loss ﬁlter design. This technique
comes from the idea of using a certain transformed speciﬁcation, which minimizes the error
of the decay times in a mean-square sense. The actual ﬁlter design process can be done by
any least squares ﬁlter design algorithm. Later, Bank and Välimäki (2003) introduced a
weighting function based on the ﬁrst-order Taylor series approximation of the decay time
errors which can be used in the design of high order loss ﬁlters. Generally, both of these
aforementioned methods result in ﬁlters of relatively high orders.
Välimäki et al. (2004) proposed a combination of a one-pole ﬁlter and an FIR comb ﬁlter
called the ripple ﬁlter in order to achieve a reduced-complexity loss ﬁlter for harpsichord
synthesis. This technique allows exact matching of the decay rate of one partial and thus
some variation in overall response. However, this technique seems to be insufﬁcient for
piano synthesis where the decay process is more complicated.
Rauhala et al. (2005) proposed an extension to the design method presented in (Välimäki
et al., 2004) in a sense that more than one feedforward path is added in cascade with the
one-pole ﬁlter. The design method is custom-made in addition to automatic smoothing of
the gain speciﬁcation. It is capable of high accuracy with a low computational cost.
Modeling the Dispersion
Another physical phenomena occurring in piano strings is dispersion. Due to the high
stiffness of the strings, the resulting sound is inharmonic as the partials are slightly higher
than those of the harmonic case. This is a feature that can not be ignored in high-quality
synthesis. Unfortunately, for accurate simulation, a high-order ﬁlter is needed.
The inharmonicity of the strings is usually modeled with an allpass ﬁlter, which does not
affect the magnitude response of the system (Smith, 1983; Garnett, 1987). As the target is
to make the higher frequencies propagate faster along the string, a ﬁlter with a proper phase
response is needed. The frequency of the  th partial of a tone can be computed as (Fletcher
et al., 1962)




 
 
" 

 (3.5)
where


is the nominal fundamental frequency and  is the inharmonicity coefﬁcient. The
phase delay speciﬁcation for the allpass ﬁlter can be written as



 

	




 



 ' (3.6)
CHAPTER 3. DIGITAL WAVEGUIDE MODELING OF THE PIANO 19
where 
 is the delayline length of the string and
 


  is the delay speciﬁcation of the loss
ﬁlter. From Eq. 3.6, the phase speciﬁcation for the allpass ﬁlter can be derived.
Van Duyne and Smith (1994, 1995) proposed a bank of ﬁrst-order allpass ﬁlters for the
dispersion simulation. However, this approach does not allow completely accurate simula-
tion of the dispersion phenomenon. A more accurate solution was introduced by Rocchesso
and Scalcon (1996). The method computes the ﬁlter coefﬁcients from an overdetermined
system of equations by using the least-squared equation error criteria. In addition, the
method takes the ﬁne-tuning of the string into account in the design process. The disadvan-
tage is the increased computational load.
Bank (2000b) introduced a multirate approach to decrease the computational load of the
dispersion simulation signiﬁcantly. He took advantage of the fact that the lowest tones of
the piano can be simulated at half sampling rate. The ﬁlter simulating dispersion may thus
be more complex for accurate simulation of the phenomenon. On the other hand, only
interpolating ﬁlters in the outputs of the lowest tones are needed.
3.2.2 Modeling the Hammer
The interaction between the hammer and the string is highly nonlinear, which makes the
modeling procedure more complicated. The nonlinearity comes from the felt covering the
hammer, which exhibits a hysteretic behavior: The contact force during the compression is
different from that during the decompression.
The contact force between the hammer and string can be described by the equation
 













 (3.7)
where



is the hammer mass and 

is the hammer displacement. The relation can be
interpreted as the hammer being a lumped mass connected to a nonlinear spring. As can be
found from literature, see e.g. (Chaigne and Askenfelt, 1994a), the hammer-string interac-
tion can be described by the equation
 


	








(3.8)
where

!



  

 presents the compression of the hammer felt and 

is the
string position. In Eq. 3.8,

stands for hammer stiffness coefﬁcient and  is the stiffness
exponent. Both of these parameters are usually determined from experimental data. The
condition


 applies when the hammer is in contact with the string and the latter
condition


 is valid when the hammer is not in touch with the string.
Eq. 3.8 does not describe the phenomenon fully satisfactorily, since in real piano the
CHAPTER 3. DIGITAL WAVEGUIDE MODELING OF THE PIANO 20
hammers indicate hysteretic behavior. This problem was studied by Stulov (1995). He
solved the problem by replacing the ﬁrst part of Eq. 3.8 by
 



 	
 


 (3.9)
where  



 

$
is a relaxation function, 
 stands for hysteresis constant and  is
“nondimensional time”. As the relaxation function depends on time, it can be interpreted
that it represents the “memory” of the material.
When it comes to modeling, the hammer model can be discretized and coupled to the
string. There still exists a problem, though. There is a mutual dependence between Eq. 3.7
and Eq. 3.9, namely the hammer position should be known before computing the force and
the force should be known before computing the hammer position.
The implicit relation between Eq. 3.7 and Eq. 3.9 can be made explicit by inserting a
ﬁctitious delay element in the model. This kind of approach is widely used in literature, see
e.g. (Chaigne and Askenfelt, 1994a,b). However, this kind of approximation can make the
model unstable.
To avoid the problem described above in addition to the nonlinearity problem, Smith and
Van Duyne (1995) came up with an idea that the hammer-string interaction consist of a
few discrete events during the hammer strike. These hammer strikes can be approximated
with one or more impulses that are ﬁltered with a lowpass ﬁlters. Taking advantage of the
superposition of single lowpass ﬁltered impulses the resulted signal approximates the force
impulse in a very efﬁcient way. The parameters of these ﬁlters depend on the collision
velocity. That is, changing the collision velocity means that the ﬁlter parameters must be
changed. In addition, with this method the hammer restrike cannot be simulated correctly.
On the other hand, the advantage is that the linearized hammer can be included to the
commuted piano model.
A more general method was presented by Borin et al. (2000). This method, called the “K
method” maps the interaction force  as a function of the linear combination of the past
values of the string and hammer positions as well as the interaction force. The advance
is that the instantaneous dependencies of the variables are dropped. For a more extensive
description of the method, see (Borin et al., 2000).
A more recent study is presented in Bank (2000b,a). The multi-rate hammer model
overcomes the stability problem by doubling the sample rate in order to achieve smaller
changes in the variables of interest. However, doubling the sample rate in the whole string
model would double the computational load as well. To overcome this problem, Bank
suggests that only the hammer would operate at the increased sampling rate.
CHAPTER 3. DIGITAL WAVEGUIDE MODELING OF THE PIANO 21
3.2.3 Modeling the Soundboard
The soundboard is the main radiating part of the piano. Its task is to color and amplify the
sound as well as to create the sensation of presence. Despite its importance, it is the least
studied part of the piano.
The modeling is often done with feedback delay networks (FDN), which are known to be
efﬁcient for room reverberation simulations due to their abilities to achieve high modal den-
sity, see e.g. (Jot and Chaigne, 1991). The problem with FDN systems is that the choice of
parameter values seems to have no correspondence in the real world. The delayline lengths
are somewhat arbitrary, only the lengths are preferred to be prime numbers in order to avoid
the unwanted coloration (Gardner, 1998). In addition, the modeling can be addressed as a
ﬁlter design problem. Due to high modal density, high ﬁlter orders must be used.
The ﬁrst DWG piano presented by Garnett (1987) included a soundboard model with six
extra waveguides connected to the bridge at a single location. This simple, but efﬁcient
model can be interpreted as a predecessor for the feedback delay network solution for the
soundboard modeling. Bank (2000b) proposed a soundboard model structure based on
FDN with shaping ﬁlters. These ﬁlters match the system to imitate the overall magnitude
response of a real piano as well as possible.
Välimäki et al. (2004) presented an efﬁcient system for harpsichord soundboard mod-
eling based on the algorithm presented in (Väänänen et al., 1997). The model consists of
eight delay lines, loss ﬁlters and comb allpass ﬁlters. This structure results in an authentic
impulse response of a harpsichord soundboard.
Chapter 4
A Novel Loss Filter Design Technique
The purpose of the loss ﬁlter is to model the decay rate of the partials accurately. Usually,
the loss ﬁlter is a low order FIR or IIR ﬁlter (Smith, 1983; Bank and Välimäki, 2003).
For good accuracy, a high-order ﬁlter is needed because the variations of the magnitude
response from one partial to the next one cannot be matched with a low order ﬁlter. In loss
ﬁlter design, a major problem is that the desired magnitude response is usually speciﬁed on
a very narrow frequency band. For example, for the lowest keys of the piano, the partials
below 2 kHz affect the sound most, and it is difﬁcult to accurately estimate the decay rate
of high-frequency partials. However, the sampling rate used in high quality piano synthesis
is usually 44.1 kHz. The traditional ﬁlter design methods cannot face the challenge that the
important frequency band is only 10 percent of the audio range.
Another major problem faced in the design process is that the gain values can vary sig-
niﬁcantly between two adjacent data points. Especially, the loss ﬁlters designed for the
lowest key values would have to follow very dense and detailed gain speciﬁcation. This is
not possible for ﬁlters of low order.
The loss ﬁlter design technique presented here1 is an extension to the multi-ripple loss
ﬁlter design technique presented by Rauhala et al. (2005). The design technique proposed
in (Rauhala et al., 2005) consists of two cascaded subﬁlters. A ﬁrst-order all-pole ﬁlter takes
care of modeling the general trend of the piano tone’s decay rate and the

th-order feed-
forward comb ﬁlter models the decay rate variations from one partial to the next one. The
principal difference in the loss ﬁlter structure presented here is that in addition to the parallel
feedforward structure it is possible to insert feedforward blocks in cascade. Also the design
of the loss ﬁlter differs from the technique presented in (Rauhala et al., 2005). The method
is related to the frequency sampling (Parks and Burrus, 1987) and the IFIR ﬁlter techniques
(Neuvo et al., 1984). The structure of the proposed loss ﬁlter is based on a cascade of sparse
1also published in Lehtonen et al. (2005)
22
CHAPTER 4. A NOVEL LOSS FILTER DESIGN TECHNIQUE 23
FIR ﬁlters, which are designed one after the other on subbands that are integer fractions of
the audio range. Finally, the loss ﬁlter is up-sampled for implementation.
The proposed ﬁlter structure has three subﬁlters: The equalizer, the anti-imaging ﬁlter
and the multi-ripple ﬁlter. The equalizer is responsible for the general trend of the piano
tone’s decay, the anti-imaging ﬁlter attenuates the image frequency responses caused by
upsampling, and the multi-ripple ﬁlter is designed to ﬁt the data as well as possible.
The purpose of the equalizer and the anti-imaging ﬁlter is basically the same as the anti-
imaging ﬁlter in the IFIR technique. In the IFIR technique, it is important to eliminate the
image frequency responses that result from the compression of the frequency response. In
this case, it is not desired to completely get rid of the image frequency responses, since there
are partials on higher frequencies as well. Instead, we need to be sure that these partials do
not dominate the sound but are appropriately attenuated.
The block diagram of the

th-order loss ﬁlter is shown in Fig. 4.1. The blocks  


and  are the equalizer, the anti-imaging ﬁlter, and the multi-ripple ﬁlter, respectively.
The system of Fig. 4.1 can be implemented in a time-reversed form, since then the delay
blocks of the anti-imaging ﬁlter and the multi-ripple ﬁlter can share delay elements with the
long delay line of length 
 in the waveguide model.
c

a
 b

r
1

r
2

r
N

z
-
M
2
R
1

z
-
M
2
R
2

z
-
M
2
R
N

z
-
1
 z
-
M
1

H
1
 H
2
 H
3

x
(
n
)
 y
(
n
)

Figure 4.1: Block diagram of the

th-order loss ﬁlter consisting of three subﬁlters: 
 is
the equalizer, 

is the anti-imaging ﬁlter, and 
 is the multi-ripple ﬁlter.
CHAPTER 4. A NOVEL LOSS FILTER DESIGN TECHNIQUE 24
4.1 Equalizer Design
The equalizer is designed as a ﬁrst-order FIR ﬁlter in a way that the magnitude response
matches two given data points, such as those at the fundamental frequency and at the
Nyquist frequency. The result should imitate the general trend of the piano tone’s decay
rate in the band 0  22.05 kHz. The phase is not linear, but since the changes in phase delay
response are not signiﬁcant, about 0.05 percent of the delay line length 
 with practical
parameter values, this does not cause any problems. The dashed line in Fig. 4.2 presents
the magnitude response of the equalizer.
0 5 10 15 20
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
Frequency (kHz)
Filter gain
Figure 4.2: The magnitude responses of the subﬁlters presented in Fig. 4.1: The equalizer
(dashed line), the anti-imaging ﬁlter with  

(dash-dotted line), the multi-ripple ﬁlter
with 



(solid line), and the resulting loss ﬁlter (thick line).
4.2 Anti-Imaging Filter Design
The anti-imaging ﬁlter has two important tasks. Firstly, it takes care of attenuating the
resulting image frequency responses and secondly, it can be used for easing the modeling
of the important frequency band.
The ﬁlter is designed on a reduced frequency band in the same manner as the equalizer. It
is important that the up-sampling factor   is selected in a way that the anti-imaging ﬁlter
attenuates the frequency band below 5 kHz appropriately. It has been found out that factor
CHAPTER 4. A NOVEL LOSS FILTER DESIGN TECHNIQUE 25
6 is sufﬁcient for the lowest piano tones (key index



 ) whereas for the key indices
about 10  20 factor 2 works well. In the middle range, where the harmonics cover a larger
portion of the audio range, the anti-imaging ﬁlter is not essential. The resulting magnitude
response is presented in Fig. 4.2 with a dash-dotted line.
4.3 Multi-Ripple Filter Design
The multi-ripple ﬁlter design process presented here results in the same multi-ripple ﬁlter
structure as presented in (Rauhala et al., 2005). On the other hand, the design processes
are somewhat different since the design method presented here uses standard ﬁlter design
techniques.
The desired gain values can be determined from a real piano sound since the relation
between the decay time constant of the  th partial and the corresponding ﬁlter gain value
can be expressed with the closed form formula of Eq. 3.4.
The general trend of the obtained gain is decreasing at higher frequencies. This makes the
task harder for the ﬁlter design algorithms. However, this problem can be made easier by
multiplying the gain values with the inverse magnitude response values of the equalizer and
the anti-imaging ﬁlter. Hence, the gain values are around one. This effect is compensated
at the end with the equalizer and the anti-imaging ﬁlter.
The problem that the data covers only a small part of the audio range can be overcome by
critical down-sampling. When the frequency of the largest partial is

.
, the up-sampling
factor for critical down-sampling is 


ﬂoor

  
   


.
 and the new sampling
rate is
	 
  
  

.
The actual design method is based on frequency sampling (Parks and Burrus, 1987). First
the impulse response (and thus the corresponding FIR ﬁlter coefﬁcients) is obtained from
the magnitude response by inverse discrete Fourier transform. After this, the

largest val-
ues are chosen and the other coefﬁcients are set to zero. When

is chosen to be the exact
number of the partials, it is possible to design a ﬁlter which models the given frequency re-
sponse perfectly. When the impulse response is up-sampled, the result is a sparse FIR ﬁlter.
In the frequency domain, the up-sampling means that 



image frequency responses
follow the original frequency response. The magnitude responses of all three subﬁlters in
the case of the exact ﬁt at the lowest frequencies are presented in Fig. 4.2.
In the case of low ﬁlter orders, the ﬁt in the data cannot be perfect, though, the

largest
values of the impulse response ﬁt the obtained magnitude response to the data best in the
least-square sense. In the loss ﬁlter design, it is usually desired that especially the highest
peaks are modeled accurately, since the gain values near the value one have the longest
decay times. This fact can be taken into account in the design by emphasizing the largest
CHAPTER 4. A NOVEL LOSS FILTER DESIGN TECHNIQUE 26
gain values with a weighting function presented by Bank and Välimäki (2003).
4.4 Design Example: Perfect Match of 50 Partials
This example describes how to design a ﬁlter which matches the 50 lowest-order partials
for the key index 3 (



 3

Hz).
In the loss ﬁlter design, the case of an exact ﬁt to the data has been considered partic-
ularly problematic. Laroche and Meillier (1994) have presented a method for designing
a perfect match: When all harmonics are measured correctly, the loss ﬁlter can be imple-
mented so that every partial is modeled with its own resonator. The computational cost of
the implementation becomes large at low fundamental frequencies, when there are many
partials to be modeled. The approach taken here is somewhat different and it leads to a
computationally more efﬁcient implementation.
The ﬁrst phase of the design process is to determine the new, reduced sampling rate.
When the target is to model 50 lowest-order partials accurately for the key index 3, the
highest frequency in the data is 1543 Hz. This means that the up-sampling factor 

is
chosen to be 14 and the new sampling rate used during the design is
  
  Hz 


	

Hz.
The second phase is to design the equalizer and the anti-imaging ﬁlter. The up-sampling
factor 
 for the anti-imaging ﬁlter is chosen to be 6.
In the next phase, inverse DFT is applied and the obtained impulse response is made
minimum phase with Matlab’s ’rceps’ function (MAT, 2004). After this, 50 largest im-
pulse response values are selected to be the FIR ﬁlter coefﬁcients. At the end, the impulse
response is up-sampled by factor 14 and a sparse FIR ﬁlter is obtained.
In Fig. 4.3 (a), it is seen that the resulted magnitude response (solid line) follows exactly
the gain speciﬁcation (dots). Fig. 4.3 (b) presents the corresponding


-times, i.e. the
time it takes for each harmonic to decay 60 dB. The dashed line presents a response of the
system without the anti-imaging ﬁlter. It can be seen that in the


-domain there are large
values around 3 kHz, which do not follow the general trend of the gain speciﬁcation (dots).
This observation states that the usage of the anti-imaging ﬁlter is necessary especially in
the case of low key indices. In the case the anti-imaging ﬁlter is used, the



-time is only
about 3 seconds, and thus does not have a signiﬁcant effect on the resulting sound.
4.5 Design Example: Low Order Sparse FIR Filter
When the selected ﬁlter order is low, some compromises in the ﬁtting must be done. One
solution is to smooth the original data so that a few important points are preserved. Smooth-
CHAPTER 4. A NOVEL LOSS FILTER DESIGN TECHNIQUE 27
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 16000.9
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
Frequency (Hz)
Gain
30 100 300 1 000 3 000 10 0000
10
20
30
40
Frequency (Hz)
T60 (s)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3: (a) The gain speciﬁcations (dots), the magnitude response (solid line) and the
magnitude response without the anti-imaging ﬁlter (dashed line) of the designed system and
(b) the corresponding reverberation time as a function of log frequency.
ing the data simpliﬁes the design task signiﬁcantly as most of the minor details are ignored.
In the following, the data is smoothed in the same way as in (Rauhala et al., 2005): The
amplitude maxima, loop gain maxima, and local maxima and minima are chosen as the
points to be preserved, and these points are connected with a smooth polynomial func-
tion, which can be obtained by Matlabs’’polyﬁt’,’polyder’,and ’interp1’functions (MAT,
2004). The smoothing can be done also with Linear Predictive Coding (LPC), which is
known to model the spectral peaks efﬁciently. However, neither one of the smoothing meth-
ods presented here is perfect. As the performance of the loss ﬁlter design relies heavily on
the data smoothing, further investigations should be done in order to improve the expression
power of this loss ﬁlter design technique.
After applying the inverse DFT, the four largest impulse response values are selected.
These values can be optimized with the sparse weighted least squares technique presented
in (Tarczynski and Välimäki, 1996). The optimized ﬁlter coefﬁcients are calculated with
(Parks and Burrus, 1987)
CHAPTER 4. A NOVEL LOSS FILTER DESIGN TECHNIQUE 28

	

	
 (4.1)
where

is the DFT matrix (see e.g. (Mitra, 2002)),
	
is a diagonal weighting matrix
whose  th diagonal element is   , and

is the target frequency response vector. The
matrix

is modiﬁed in a way that only the elements corresponding to the selected impulse
response values are nonzero (Tarczynski and Välimäki, 1996). The weighting function is
the same as presented in (Bank and Välimäki, 2003), and it can be written as
 

  0


$
3 (4.2)
An example design is presented in Fig. 4.4 with a thick line. The up-sampling factors,
the equalizer, and the anti-imaging ﬁlters of the previous design example are used, because
the gain speciﬁcations are again for the key index 3.
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
Frequency (Hz)
Gain
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 16000
10
20
30
Frequency (Hz)
T60 (s)
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.4: (a) The gain speciﬁcation (dots) and the results of three design examples: Low-
order loss ﬁlter presented here (thick), low-order loss ﬁlter presented in (Rauhala et al.,
2005) (dashed), and high-order conventional ﬁlter (dash-dotted). (b) The corresponding
reverberation times.
CHAPTER 4. A NOVEL LOSS FILTER DESIGN TECHNIQUE 29
4.6 Results and Comparisons
In this section, the novel loss ﬁlter design technique is compared against the existing meth-
ods. The ﬁlters are the loss ﬁlter presented in (Rauhala et al., 2005) and a ﬁlter which is
designed using Matlab’s ’invfreqz’ function and the weighting function in Eq. 4.2. The
latter ﬁlter design process results in an IIR ﬁlter with a ﬁrst order denominator and a nu-
merator of order 201. The data is the same as used in Sections 4.4 and 4.5. The results of
the comparison are presented in Fig. 4.4.
The characteristics of the proposed loss ﬁlter are shown in Fig. 4.4 with a thick line. It
can be seen that the ﬁlter magnitude response follows the gain speciﬁcation quite accurately
at frequencies below 800 Hz. Also the highest peaks are modeled well. In the
 

-domain,
which is more interesting from the perceptual point of view, the results are also quite sufﬁ-
cient.
The loss ﬁlter presented in (Rauhala et al., 2005) did also well in the comparison. Its
magnitude response is presented in Fig. 4.4 with a dashed line. The high-order IIR ﬁlter
is also practically as good as the two other ﬁlters presented, but the order of the ﬁlter is 40
times larger.
Obviously, the two loss ﬁlters presented here and in (Rauhala et al., 2005) are better for
instrument synthesis purpose, since their computational cost is signiﬁcantly smaller than
the cost of the high-order ﬁlter with the same performance.
The differences of the proposed ﬁlter and the ﬁlter presented in (Rauhala et al., 2005)
are minor when it comes to accuracy of the modeling. The computational costs are equally
large. The major difference and improvement lies in the design. Since the ﬁlter proposed in
this thesis uses standard ﬁlter design techniques, it is somewhat easier to design.
4.7 Conclusion
A new method of the loss ﬁlter design for piano synthesis purposes was presented. The
proposed ﬁlter structure is based on a cascade of sparse FIR ﬁlters, which are designed one
after the other on subbands and are then up-sampled for implementation. The strengths
of this method are its simplicity and good performance even with low ﬁlter orders. It is
also possible to design a ﬁlter, which models the given gain speciﬁcation perfectly. In
comparison against a traditional, non-sparse ﬁlter, the proposed loss ﬁlter performs well
with a signiﬁcantly smaller computational cost.
Chapter 5
Modeling of the Sustain Pedal
The importance of the sustain pedal can hardly be overestimated when it comes to profes-
sional piano performance. The decisions that the pianist makes about using the sustain pedal
affects the whole style and nature of the music. At the same time, the effect is extremely
complex, both from the musical and the physical point of view.
The art of using the sustain pedal is far from being an easy subject, since the proper use of
the device is highly dependent on the era during which the music was composed. In the 18th
century the use of the sustain pedal was considered to be mainly a special effect, whereas
the piano music composed in the 19th and 20th centuries tends to be heavily pedaled. This
fact, among others, needs to be taken into account when it comes to high quality piano
music.
Despite the importance of the sustain pedal effect, the subject is much less studied than
most other areas of the piano performance and physics. Only few studies can be found
in literature (De Poli et al., 1998; Ambrosini et al., 1995), but they show interesting and
beyond dispute important results. In Section 5.1.2, a brief overview of the research done in
the ﬁeld is given.
The use of the pedal device has primarily two purposes. First, it serves as “extra ﬁngers”
in situations where legato playing is not possible with any ﬁngering. Second, since all
strings are free to vibrate, a great enrichment of the tone is obtained.
5.1 Overview of Prior Work
In the ﬁrst article that concerns the digital waveguide synthesis of the piano (Garnett, 1987),
the author divides the model into ﬁve main sections: The hammer, the strings, the bridge, the
soundboard and the pedals. There has been a considerable amount of work concerning the
four aforementioned subjects, but the resonance pedal effect is much less studied. However,
30
CHAPTER 5. MODELING OF THE SUSTAIN PEDAL 31
many authors have mentioned the pedal device in their articles and considered a way to
model it (see e.g. Garnett (1987); Bank et al. (2003)) but very few implementations have
been presented. Accordingly, there is a need for research in this particular ﬁeld.
5.1.1 The Sustain Pedal Effect
The sustain pedal effect is twofold. Firstly, the strings corresponding to the depressed key
continue to vibrate after the key is released. However, this does not affect the reverberation
time signiﬁcantly, as is shown in Section 5.2.1. Secondly, the other strings are set into
vibration by sympathetic resonance. Also, the impulse that the hammer gives to the strings
excites the string register (that is, the whole set of strings). This effect is clearly audible in
the piano sound, especially when single tones are played.
Due to the sympathetic resonance of the strings, beating in the tone is increased. To
analyze this phenomenon exactly is extremely difﬁcult since the number of strings in a
concert grand piano is nearly 250. The total amount of harmonic components in the whole
system is huge, and every one of them can (at least, in theory) start to beat with one of the
harmonics present in the played tone. The beating is thus by no means regular as in those
cases the sustain pedal is not employed. This feature is shown in Figs. 5.5, 5.6 and 5.7.
In order to make the algorithm perform efﬁciently in the cases where many tones are
played at the same time, these phenomena must be somehow simpliﬁed. In addition, the
target is to ﬁnd a simple solution which does not require any additional information other
than the key index of the tone.
5.1.2 Studies Concerning the Modeling of the Sustain Pedal
Two studies about the sustain pedal modeling can be found in literature. One of them is a
patent, which describes a pedal resonance effect simulation device for digital pianos (De
Poli et al., 1998). The other study is given by Ambrosini et al. (1995). Both of these
published solutions employ a certain number of simpliﬁed string models as a main part of
the sustain pedal algorithm.
De Poli et al. (1998) presented a model with 28 ideal string models, of which 18 are ﬁxed
length and 10 are variable length. The output from these two junctions are lowpass ﬁltered
with a cutoff frequency of 1 kHz. The output from the whole system is multiplied with a
coefﬁcient, which determines the depth of the resonance pedal effect. Finally, the pedaled
sound is added to the direct sound. With this device, an authentic resonance effect can be
achieved.
Ambrosini et al. (1995) presented a little bit simpler model for sustain pedal simulations
applied to recorded piano sounds. The effect is obtained with a bridge-string model which
CHAPTER 5. MODELING OF THE SUSTAIN PEDAL 32
employs two parameters: One for controlling the decay time, that is, the loop gain, and the
other for the characteristic admittance, which controls the energy leakage from the strings
to the bridge and the soundboard. In this model, the 48 strings used are divided into two
groups: The ﬁrst set of 24 strings consists of ﬁxed length strings simulating the “ensemble”
of the strings whereas the other set consists of strings whose length is varied depending on
the depressed key.
5.2 Reverberator Algorithm for Sustain Pedal Modeling
In this section, a simple but efﬁcient algorithm for sustain pedal simulation is presented. It
is based on 12 long delay lines which simulate the ﬁrst 12 strings of the piano. In order to
develop the algorithm further, more information about the phenomenon must be achieved.
This analysis can be done by examining recorded tones and string register responses.
5.2.1 Signal Analysis
By analyzing the string register responses (that is, the response of all strings when the
system is excited with the hammer) and tones with and without the sustain pedal depressed,
two major differences can be found. The ﬁrst one is caused by the freely vibrating strings,
which are set into vibration by the hammer energy as they are not damped. The second
phenomenon is noticed as increased beating in the tone, as the energy of the vibrating string
set is leaking into other strings via the bridge. In addition, airborne sound has prominent
effect on the excitation of the string register. In this section, the phenomenon is illustrated
with the key indices 4 (note C1), 40 (note C4) and 76 (note C7), which represent examples
of bass, middle and treble tones, respectively.
String Register Response
The ﬁrst phenomenon can be illustrated by two examples. The ﬁrst one is the impulse
response of the string register system when the sustain pedal is depressed and the string
group corresponding to the depressed key is damped. In the other case, the situation is
similar except the sustain pedal is not depressed.
The string register responses are illustrated with 3D waterfall plots, see Figs. 5.1, 5.2 and
5.3. The plots are obtained by performing time-dependent frequency analysis with Matlabs’
’specgram’ function (MAT, 2004) to the ﬁrst second of the recorded string response (the
effect of the hammer is excluded). The signals are scaled in order to avoid the possible
differences in signal levels, which are due to recordings. The scaling is performed by
dividing each signal by its power and setting the maximum value to 0.99. The frequency
CHAPTER 5. MODELING OF THE SUSTAIN PEDAL 33
analysis is done with 256 point FFT applying a Hann window of length 64 samples with 32
samples overlap.
In the case of key index 4, the differences are shown in Fig. 5.1. In this ﬁgure, the
magnitude of the ﬁrst second of the string register response is presented as a function of
frequency. As can be noted from Fig. 5.1 (a), after one second the overall response has
decayed about 25 dB, whereas in the other case (b) the response has decayed about 40 dB
within the same time. The situation is similar with the key indices 40 and 76, see Figs.
5.2 and 5.3. With these observations, it can be concluded that the reverberation time of the
string register system is longer when the sustain pedal is used.
(a) (b)
0
0.5
1
0
5
10
−40
−20
0
20
40
Time/sFrequency/kHz
Magnitude/dB
0
0.5
1
0
5
10
−40
−20
0
20
40
Time/sFrequency/kHz
Magnitude/dB
Figure 5.1: 3D plot of the string register response with (a) and without (b) the sustain pedal.
The key index is 4.
(a) (b)
0
0.5
1
0
5
10
−40
−20
0
20
40
Time/sFrequency/kHz
Magnitude/dB
0
0.5
1
0
5
10
−40
−20
0
20
40
Time/sFrequency/kHz
Magnitude/dB
Figure 5.2: 3D plot of the string register response with (a) and without (b) the sustain pedal.
The key index is 40.
CHAPTER 5. MODELING OF THE SUSTAIN PEDAL 34
(a) (b)
0
0.5
1
0
5
10
−40
−20
0
20
40
Time/sFrequency/kHz
Magnitude/dB
0
0.5
1
0
5
10
−40
−20
0
20
40
Time/sFrequency/kHz
Magnitude/dB
Figure 5.3: 3D plot of the string register response with (a) and without (b) the sustain pedal.
The key index is 76.
Another way to illustrate the ﬁrst phenomenon is to plot the energy of the string register
response with and without the sustain pedal in octave bands. The energy is obtained from
the spectrum of the signal by summing up the output corresponding to a certain octave band.
The energy is measured from the ﬁrst second of the signal, and the effect of the hammer hit
is minimized by excluding it in order to obtain the energy of the true string register response.
The signals are scaled in the same way in order to avoid possible differences between signal
levels in the recordings. The center frequencies of the octave bands are shown in Table 5.1.
The results are shown in Fig. 5.4 in the case of key indices 4 (a), 40 (b) and 76 (c). From
the ﬁgure it can be seen that the energy is greater in those cases the sustain pedal is pressed
down. In the cases (a) and (c), there is a clear difference between the signal energies but
in (b) the phenomenon is not that clear. Generally, this comes from the input signal level
adjustment during the recordings. In the case of key index 40, the levels vary signiﬁcantly.
The scaling process facilitates the problem, but as the signal is ampliﬁed, the background
noise is also ampliﬁed. However, in general we can draw a conclusion that the energy of
the string register response is greater when the sustain pedal is used.
Beating
The increased beating can be studied by separating the harmonics from the recorded signals
by bandpass ﬁltering. After a sufﬁcient number of harmonics have been separated, the
envelopes of the harmonics are calculated. In Figs. 5.5, 5.6 and 5.7 the results are shown in
the case of three example tones, C1, C4 and C7, respectively. In the ﬁrst case, harmonics
with indices 2-7 are plotted, since the fundamental frequency was lost in the background
noise. In the second case, that is, the note C4, ﬁrst six harmonics are plotted. In the case
CHAPTER 5. MODELING OF THE SUSTAIN PEDAL 35
Table 5.1: Octave bands used in the string register response energy calculations.
Octave band Lower cutoff Center Upper cutoff
index frequency/Hz frequency/Hz frequency/Hz
1 22 31.5 44
2 44 63 88
3 88 125 177
4 177 250 355
5 355 500 710
6 710 1000 1420
7 1420 2000 2840
8 2840 4000 5680
9 5680 8000 11360
of the note C7, only two ﬁrst harmonics are plotted as the others were lost in background
noise.
As can be seen, the effect of the beating depends on the pitch of the depressed key. In
the bass range, the differences are minor whereas in the middle range the differences are
signiﬁcant. Moreover, the increased beating seems to be dominating especially in the lowest
harmonics. In the treble range, the beating is not prominent in either case. From these
ﬁgures it can also be seen that the decay time of the tone does not depend on the usage
of the sustain pedal in most cases. With some harmonics this assumption does not hold,
as seen in Fig. 5.5 in the case of the ﬁfth harmonic. This is probably because of energy
leakage from some other strings that have a harmonic precisely at the same frequency.
These harmonics amplify each other causing longer decay time.
To conclude, there are two signiﬁcant effects resulting from the usage of the sustain
pedal. The ﬁrst one is a "stir" resulting from the string register system as it is excited by the
hammer corresponding to the key that is played. Another important effect is the increased
beating, as the energy is leaking to the string register via the bridge and the airborne sound.
5.2.2 Algorithm for Modeling the Sustain Pedal Effect
The basic idea of the reverberator algorithm for sustain pedal modeling to be presented
lies on the imitation of the string register. Ambrosini et al. (1995) suggested the usage of a
prominent number of string models. By using reduced amount of strings, the computational
load can be facilitated. The authors suggest that the highest strings can be neglected as they
have only minor inﬂuence on the sound, whereas the lowest keys contain more harmonics
and are advantageous in that sense. According to the listening tests they conducted, they
CHAPTER 5. MODELING OF THE SUSTAIN PEDAL 36
(a) (b)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
−70
−50
−30
−10
10
30
50
70
Octave Band Index
Average Magnitude/dB
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
−70
−50
−30
−10
10
30
50
70
Octave Band Index
(c)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
−70
−50
−30
−10
10
30
50
70
Octave Band Index
Average Magnitude/dB
Figure 5.4: The energy of the string register response when the sustain pedal is depressed
(solid line) and when the sustain pedal is not depressed (dashed line). The key indices are
4 (a), 40 (b) and 76 (c).
ended up with a model of 48 strings. However, the number of strings must be still reduced
in order to get a computationally efﬁcient algorithm.
In the model presented here, the amount of strings is determined to be 12, and their
lengths correspond to 12 longest strings of the piano. By doing this, a reverberating com-
ponent for every tone in the piano can be guaranteed, at least at some accuracy. In rever-
beration algorithm design for imitating room acoustics, usually the delay line lengths of
incommensurate numbers are preferred in order to avoid unwanted coloration in the sound
(Gardner, 1998). In the case of sustain pedal modeling, the objective is to design a “bad”
algorithm in that sense, since some coloration and excited modes are wanted.
By inserting a comb allpass ﬁlter into the feedback loops, a diffusing effect can be
brought about (Väänänen et al., 1997) in the system. In addition, Väänänen et al. (1997)
pointed out that when the sum of the outputs from the strings is fed back to their inputs,
CHAPTER 5. MODELING OF THE SUSTAIN PEDAL 37
0 5 10
−50
0
Partial 2
Time/s
Amplitude/dB 0 5 10
−50
0
Partial 3
Time/s
Amplitude/dB
0 5 10
−50
0
Partial 4
Time/s
Amplitude/dB 0 5 10
−50
0
Partial 5
Time/s
Amplitude/dB
0 5 10
−50
0
Partial 6
Time/s
Amplitude/dB 0 5 10
−50
0
Partial 7
Time/s
Amplitude/dB
Figure 5.5: The envelopes of the harmonics 2-7 of the piano tone C1 (key index 4) when
the sustain pedal is depressed (solid line) and without the sustain pedal (dashed line).
the modal density can be increased signiﬁcantly. This is important, because in real situa-
tions the number of excited signal components is large, and thus a sufﬁcient modal density
must be achieved with the simulation model as well. The block diagram of the system is
presented in Fig. 5.8. The choice of the parameters is discussed later.
In order to increase beating, a resonator can be added to the signal path. As noted in the
previous section, the increased beating is dominating in the lowest harmonics. Bearing this
in mind, it is reasonable to tune the resonator close to the fundamental frequency. If it is
desired to have even more beating, several resonators can be included to the signal path.
However, this increases the computational load as well. As already mentioned, the effects
and the behavior of the beating phenomenon is extremely complex and calls for further
studies.
CHAPTER 5. MODELING OF THE SUSTAIN PEDAL 38
0 2 4 6
−50
0
Partial 1
Time/s
Amplitude/dB 0 2 4 6
−50
0
Partial 2
Time/s
Amplitude/dB
0 2 4 6
−50
0
Partial 3
Time/s
Amplitude/dB 0 2 4 6
−50
0
Partial 4
Time/s
Amplitude/dB
0 2 4 6
−50
0
Partial 5
Time/s
Amplitude/dB 0 2 4 6
−50
0
Partial 6
Time/s
Amplitude/dB
Figure 5.6: The envelopes of the ﬁrst six harmonics of the piano tone C4 (key index 40)
when the sustain pedal is depressed (solid line) and without the sustain pedal (dashed line).
0 2 4
−60
−40
−20
0
Partial 1
Time/s
Amplitude/dB
0 2 4
−60
−40
−20
0
Partial 2
Time/s
Amplitude/dB
Figure 5.7: The envelopes of the ﬁrst two harmonics of the piano tone C7 (key index 76)
when the sustain pedal is depressed (solid line) and without the sustain pedal (dashed line).
Delay Line Lengths
The lengths of the delay lines are set to match the frequencies of the 12 lowest tones of the
piano according to the formula 5.1.


round

	


 (5.1)
CHAPTER 5. MODELING OF THE SUSTAIN PEDAL 39
R(z)

Z
-L1
 A
1
(z)

Z
-L12
 A
12
(z)

g
dl

g
dl

g
fb

g
mix

x
in
 y
out

Figure 5.8: The block diagram of the sustain pedal algorithm.
where
 
is the sampling frequency and


is the fundamental frequency of the tone. The
rounding operation is performed, because without a fractional delay ﬁlter (see e.g. (Laakso
et al., 1996) for more information about fractional delay ﬁlters) only integer delay lines can
be implemented. It would be possible to insert a fractional delay ﬁlter into the model, but
this does not improve the resulting sound signiﬁcantly. Actually, a rough approximation is
even better here, since in the real situation the resonating frequencies are likely to be only
near the harmonics of the played tone.
Allpass Filter Parameters
The transfer function of the  th allpass ﬁlter can be written as

  




 "
$


"



	
$

 (5.2)
where all the ﬁlter coefﬁcients



 are set to 0.05 and the allpass delays   are chosen to
be 8% of the delay lines 
  , as suggested in (Välimäki et al., 2004).
Other Parameters
The gain values 
 
, 

 and  .  in the algorithm must be chosen carefully, since they
affect the stability of the algorithm and adjust the relations of the dry and reverberated
sound. The coefﬁcient 
 
determines the decay of the reverberated sound. In general, to
guarantee the stability, the condition  
 


must be satisﬁed. In this case, the value 
 
was chosen to be 0.999.
CHAPTER 5. MODELING OF THE SUSTAIN PEDAL 40
Väänänen (1997) suggests that the sum of the outputs of the parallel comb ﬁlters can be
multiplied with a coefﬁcient which is a negative number whose absolute value is smaller
than 1. This solution is a simpliﬁed structure of the multiple feedback delay network, orig-
inally presented by Jot and Chaigne (1991). The feedback matrix in the structure presented
by Jot and Chaigne (1991) is now replaced by a single coefﬁcient. In this case, the feedback
coefﬁcient 
  was chosen to be  0.15.
The mixing coefﬁcient 
.  is a very critical gain value, because it determines the re-
lation between the dry and reverberated sound. Too large a value can make the sound
unnatural while too a small value does not highlight the effect sufﬁciently. Practical studies
concerning this coefﬁcient show that the value of the mixing coefﬁcient depends on the key
index. In the bass range, the value is remarkably smaller than in the mid range, for exam-
ple. At this point of the research process, the mixing coefﬁcient is tuned by hand, but in
the future some relation between the mixing coefﬁcient and the key index could be derived.
This can be done for example by analyzing the recordings, especially the case where the
string group corresponding to the key to be pressed is damped while holding the sustain
pedal down. For further description of the recordings, see Appendix A. In practice, the
mixing coefﬁcients for the example tones C1, C4 and C7 are set to be 0.4, 0.18 and 0.05,
respectively.
Resonator Parameters
The purpose of the resonator is to increase the beating in the sound. It is tuned near the
fundamental frequency
 
of the tone. The coefﬁcients for the second-order resonator

 
can be determined by formulas given in (Regalia and Mitra, 1987):

 

 3



"

" 



" 

"

 
$

"  3



"

" 



 
$


" 

"

 
$

"


$

(5.3)
where
 


	 




"
	 



(5.4)


 (5.5)








(5.6)






" 3 (5.7)

is the notch bandwidth and  is the center frequency of the notch in radians.  determines
the gain at the center frequency. The choice of  depends on the desired beating frequency.
As in this case the aim is to increase beating, instead of modeling the beating exactly, the
CHAPTER 5. MODELING OF THE SUSTAIN PEDAL 41
accurate value of the beating frequency is not critical. Examinations on this subject have
shown that e.g.  3

Hz  

Hz works sufﬁciently well.
5.2.3 Results and Analysis of the Algorithm
The proposed algorithm has been analyzed with recorded sounds by doing informal listen-
ing tests. The performance of the algorithm depends on the key index. At the moment, it
works quite well for the bass and treble range. The most difﬁcult part of the piano from
the sustain pedal modeling point of view seems to be the middle range. In this range, both
beating and the “stir” of the string register are clearly audible. At the same time, the quality
of these effects are crucial elements for the authenticity of the synthetic sustain pedal. Es-
pecially, natural beating seems to be hard to implement with only one resonator. Increasing
the amount of resonators will not solve the problem, as the computational load increases
unnecessarily when many keys are depressed simultaneously, which is very a common sit-
uation when playing piano. A solution to this problem must be found in the future.
In the case of bass tones, the algorithm works sufﬁciently well. As a matter of fact,
the differences between the recorded sounds with and without the sustain pedal are not
prominent. However, there is a slight difference in nuance of these two cases, and this
nuance is fairly well obtained with the proposed algorithm.
The quality of the synthetic pedal in the case of treble tones is sufﬁcient. The stir from
the string register sounds fairly authentic. The beating is not prominent in the real pedaled
treble tones, and the result obtained with this sustain pedal algorithm is authentic also from
this point of view.
At the moment, the algorithm does not work satisfactorily for the synthetic tones. This
is probably due to the properties of the synthetic tones, as the results with recorded sounds
are fairly good. However, to make these results reliable, a more formal listening test must
be arranged in the future.
5.3 Conclusions
In this section an overview of an important feature of the piano sound, the sustain pedal, and
a reverberator algorithm for modeling the pedal was presented. This gives a starting point
to the future work, which contains some extensions to the model presented above as well
as the model for the partial sustain pedal. In addition, the effect of the sustain pedal in the
case of the lowest and highest tones must be analyzed more carefully in order to obtain high
quality synthetic sustain pedal. At this point, the algorithm is tested mainly with recorded
tones. In the future, more testing with synthetic tones must be performed. Also, a relation
between the mixing coefﬁcient and the key index must be derived.
Chapter 6
Conclusions and Future Directions
In this thesis, an overview of the piano was given. First, the acoustics of the grand piano was
studied in order to give a good baseline for the physics-based modeling work. As the digital
waveguide modeling is the most feasible modeling technique for plucked and struck string
instruments, it was studied in more depth. The most important features of the piano sound
were considered, and an overview of some modeling solutions that have been presented
in literature was given. As there were two salient points in the piano sound synthesis that
needed to be developed further, the solutions to these problems were selected to be the main
target of this work. The ﬁrst one was the modeling of the losses in the piano sound, and the
other was the development of the algorithm for the sustain pedal modeling.
In Chapter 4 a novel solution for loss ﬁlter design for modeling the complicated,
frequency-dependent decay of the piano tone with some practical design examples was
presented. With this design technique it is possible to obtain computationally efﬁcient so-
lutions compared to the traditional design techniques, which usually result in high-order
ﬁlters. In addition, this loss ﬁlter technique is easy to use, as it employs standard ﬁlter
design techniques as a part of the solution.
In Chapter 5, the sustain pedal effect was studied. The analysis was done to the recorded
string register responses and pedaled piano sounds. It was noticed that the usage of the
sustain pedal affects the sound and this effect needs to be taken into account in the modeling
procedure. A reverberator algorithm for the sustain pedal modeling was presented and the
choice of the parameters was considered.
As a result, some important features of the piano sound were studied in more depth and
modeling procedures for these features were presented. However, the presented models
could be improved further, and more work related to these solutions needs to be done. This
is a part of the future work.
In the future, the work related to the physical modeling of the piano will continue. There
42
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 43
are many issues to be studied and learned about the instrument, and the synthesis model
needs to be updated as new features are discovered.
Two main directions can be speciﬁed. Firstly, as the features of the usage of the sustain
pedal are unknown, these must be studied more carefully, and maybe some new analysis
techniques for the recorded sounds must be found. Another good option is to collaborate
with professional pianists in order to study the control of the sustain pedal in more depth.
This may be even a fundamental starting point, as the usage is only rarely an on-off process.
How the output sound depends on the control technique is an essential question for the
synthesis model. There is no point to make a sustain pedal algorithm that cannot be used in
an authentic way, especially if the other parts of the model succeed in imitating the sound
production mechanism of the instrument.
The second direction is to analyze how human auditory system perceives the features in
the piano sound. Or, more precisely, what is important or even crucial to model and which
features can be excluded in order to reduce the computational complexity of the model.
Good examples are the criteria how the loss ﬁlter design should, or actually, can be modeled.
For example, if the harmonic decay time analysis is performed to recorded sounds from two
different instruments, it is likely that there are variations between the results obtained from
the different instruments. Still, both instruments sound like piano. If the data are different,
and still both cases sound good, there must be some clearance in the design limits. In this
case, it would be possible to perform statistical analysis in order to determine limits for
the decay times, and design ﬁlters based on these limits instead of measuring the harmonic
decay times for all tones and imitate the obtained data precisely. It may simplify the model
in addition that the design procedure may become more straightforward. These assumptions
can be applied to other areas of the sound synthesis of the piano as well. As the perceptual
issues become clearer it is likely that the physical model of the piano can be more efﬁcient
and result in more authentic sound.
Bibliography
J. M. Adrien. The missing link: Modal synthesis. In G. De Poli, A. Piccialli, and C. Roads,
editors, Representations of Musical Signals, pages 269–297. The MIT Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA, 1991.
M. Ambrosini, F. Campetella, F. Scalcon, and G. Borin. Simulazione dell’effetto del pedale
di risonanze nei pianoforti digitali. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference
on Acoustic and Musical Research, pages 101–106, Ferrara, Italy, May 1995. In Italian.
D. Arﬁb. Digital synthesis of complex spectra by means of multiplication of nonlinear
distorted sine waves. Journal of the Audio Engineering Society, 27(10):757–768, 1979.
A. Askenfelt and E. Jansson. From touch to string vibrations. In A. Askenfelt, editor, Five
Lectures on the Acoustics of the Piano. Kungliga Musikaliska Akademien, Stockholm,
Sweden, 1990. http://www.speech.kth.se/music/5_lectures/contents.html.
B. Bank. Nonlinear interaction in the digital waveguide with the application to piano sound
synthesis. In Proceedings of the International Computer Music Conference, pages 54–57,
Berlin, Germany, September 2000a.
B. Bank. Physics-based sound synthesis of the piano. Master’s thesis, Budapest Uni-
versity of Technology and Economics, Budapest, Hungary, May 2000b. Published as
Report 54 of TKK Laboratory of Acoustics and Audio Signal Processing, available at
http://www.acoustics.hut.ﬁ/  bbank/thesis.html.
B. Bank, F. Avanzini, G. Borin, G. De Poli, F. Fontana, and D. Rocchesso. Physically
informed signal processing methods for piano sound synthesis: A research overview.
EURASIP Journal on Applied Signal Processing, 10:941–952, 2003.
B. Bank and V. Välimäki. Robust loss ﬁlter design for digital waveguide synthesis. IEEE
Signal Processing Letters, 10(1):18–20, 2003.
44
BIBLIOGRAPHY 45
J. Bensa. Analysis and Synthesis of Piano Sounds Using Physical and Signal Mod-
els. PhD thesis, Université de la Méditérranée, Marseille, France, 2003. Available at
http://www.lma.cnrs-mrs.fr/  bensa/.
J. Bensa, S. Bilbao, R. Kronland-Martinet, and J. O. Smith. The simulation of piano string
vibration: From physical models to ﬁnite difference schemes and digital waveguides.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 114(2):1095–1107, 2003.
J. Berthaut, M. N. Ichchou, and L. Jézéquel. Piano soundboard: Structural behaviour,
numerical and experimental study in the modal range. Applied Acoustics, 64:1113–1136,
2003.
G. Borin, G. De Poli, and D. Rocchesso. Elimination of delay-free loops in discrete-time
models of nonlinear acoustic systems. IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Process-
ing, 8(5):597–605, 2000.
C. Cadoz, A. Luciani, and J. Florens. Responsive input devices and sound synthesis by
simulation of instrumental mechanisms: The CORDIS system. Computer Music Journal,
8(3):60–73, 1983.
A. Chaigne and A. Askenfelt. Numerical simulations of piano strings. I. A physical model
for a struck string using ﬁnite difference methods. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 95(2):1112–1118, 1994a.
A. Chaigne and A. Askenfelt. Numerical simulations of piano strings. II. Comparisons with
measurements and systematic exploration of some hammer-string parameters. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 95(3):1631–1640, 1994b.
J. M. Chowning. The synthesis of complex audio spectra by means of frequency modula-
tion. Journal of the Audio Engineering Society, 21(7):526–534, 1973.
H. A. Conklin. Piano design factors — their inﬂuence on tone and acous-
tical performance. In A. Askenfelt, editor, Five Lectures on the Acous-
tics of the Piano. Kungliga Musikaliska Akademien, Stockholm, Sweden, 1990.
http://www.speech.kth.se/music/5_lectures/contents.html.
H. A. Conklin. Design and tone in the mechanoacoustic piano. Part I. Piano hammers and
tonal effects. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 99(6):3286–3296, 1996a.
H. A. Conklin. Design and tone in the mechanoacoustic piano. Part II. Piano structure.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 100(2):695–708, 1996b.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 46
G. De Poli, F. Campetella, and G. Borin. Pedal resonance effect simulation device for
digital pianos. United States Patent 5,744,743, April 1998. Appl. No. 618379, ﬁled:
March 1996.
A. Fettweis. Wave digital ﬁlters. Proceedings of the IEEE, 74(2):270–327, 1986.
J. L. Flanagan and R. M. Golden. Phase vocoder. The Bell System Technical Journal, 45:
1493–1509, 1966.
H. Fletcher, E. D. Blackham, and R. Stratton. Quality of piano tones. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 34(6):749–761, 1962.
N. H. Fletcher and T. D. Rossing. The Physics of Musical Instruments. Springer-Verlag,
New York, 1991.
N. Fogwall. Modelled digital pianos, October 2004.
http://www.af.lu.se/  fogwall/piano.html.
A. Galembo and A. Askenfelt. Signal representation and estimation of spectral parameters
by inharmonic comb ﬁlters with application to the piano. IEEE Transactions on Speech
and Audio Processing, 7(2):197–203, March 1999.
W. G. Gardner. Reverberation algorithms. In M. Kahrs and K. Brandenburg, editors, Ap-
plications of Digital Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics, pages 85–131. Kluwer
Academic, Boston, Mass, USA, 1998.
G. E. Garnett. Modeling piano sound using waveguide digital ﬁltering techniques. In
Proceedings of the International Computer Music Conference, pages 89–95, Urbana,
Illinois, USA, 1987.
L. Hiller and P. Ruiz. Synthesizing musical sounds by solving the wave equation for vibrat-
ing objects: Part 1. Journal of the Audio Engineering Society, 19(6):462–470, 1971a.
L. Hiller and P. Ruiz. Synthesizing musical sounds by solving the wave equation for vibrat-
ing objects: Part 2. Journal of the Audio Engineering Society, 19(7):542–551, 1971b.
D. A. Jaffe and J. O. Smith. Extensions of the Karplus-Strong plucked-string algorithm.
Computer Music Journal, 7(2):56–69, 1983.
J.-M. Jot and A. Chaigne. Digital delay networks for designing artiﬁcial reverberators. In
Proceedings of 90th AES Convention, Paris, France, February 1991.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 47
H. Järveläinen, V. Välimäki, and M. Karjalainen. Audibility of the timbral effects of inhar-
monicity in stringed instrument tones. Acoustics Research Letters Online, 2(3):79–84,
2001.
M. Karjalainen, V. Välimäki, and T. Tolonen. Plucked-string models: From the Karplus-
Strong algorithm to digital waveguides and beyond. Computer Music Journal, 22(3):
17–32, 1998.
K. Karplus and A. Strong. Digital synthesis of plucked-string and drum timbres. Computer
Music Journal, 7(2):43–55, 1983.
T. I. Laakso, V. Välimäki, M. Karjalainen, and U. K. Laine. Splitting the unit delay —
Tools for fractional delay ﬁlter design. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 13(1):30–60,
1996.
J. Laroche and J.-L. Meillier. Multichannel excitation/ﬁlter modeling of percussive sounds
with application to the piano. IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Processing, 2(2):
329–344, 1994.
M. Le Brun. Digital waveshaping synthesis. Journal of the Audio Engineering Society, 27
(4):250–266, 1979.
H.-M. Lehtonen, J. Rauhala, and V. Välimäki. Sparse multi-stage loss ﬁlter desing for
waveguide piano synthesis. In Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE Workshop on Applications
of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics, pages 331–334, New Paltz, NY, USA,
October 2005.
MAT. MATLAB version 7.0. The Mathworks Inc., 2004.
S. K. Mitra. Digital Signal Processing. A Computer Based Approach. McGraw-Hill, 2
edition, 2002.
J. A. Moorer. Signal processing aspects of computer music: A survey. In J. Strawn, edi-
tor, Digital Audio Signal Processing: An Anthology, chapter 5, pages 149–220. William
Kaufmann, Inc., 1985.
P. M. Morse and K. U. Ingard. Theoretical Acoustics. McGraw-Hill, 1968.
Y. Neuvo, C.-Y. Dong, and S. K. Mitra. Interpolated ﬁnite impulse response ﬁlters. IEEE
Transactions on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, 32(3):563–570, 1984.
A. V. Oppenheim and R. W. Schafer. Digital Signal Processing. Prentice-Hall, New Jersey,
USA, 1975.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 48
T. W. Parks and C. S. Burrus. Digital Filter Design. John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1987.
Piano World. What are the different pedals used for, 2005. http://www.pianoworld.com.
J. Rauhala, H.-M. Lehtonen, and V. Välimäki. Multi-ripple loss ﬁlter for waveguide piano
synthesis. In Proceedings of the International Computer Music Conference, pages 729–
732, Barcelona, Spain, September 2005.
P. A. Regalia and S. K. Mitra. Tunable digital frequency response equalization ﬁlters. IEEE
Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 35(11):118–120, 1987.
C. Roads. The Computer Music Tutorial. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA,
1995.
D. Rocchesso and F. Scalcon. Accurate dispersion simulation for piano strings. In Proceed-
ings of the Nordic Acoustical Meeting, pages 407–414, Helsinki, Finland, June 1996.
J. O. Smith. Techniques for Digital Filter Design and System Identiﬁcation with Application
to the Violin. PhD thesis, Stanford University, California, USA, 1983.
J. O. Smith. Viewpoints on the history of digital synthesis. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Computer Music Conference, pages 1–10, Montreal, Canada, 1991.
J. O. Smith. Physical modeling using digital waveguides. Computer Music Journal, 16(4):
74–91, 1992.
J. O. Smith. Acoustic modeling using digital waveguides. In C. Roads, S. T. Pope, A. Pic-
cialli, and G. De Poli, editors, Musical Signal Processing, pages 221–264. Swets and
Zeitlinger, Lisse, The Netherlands, 1997.
J. O. Smith and S. A. Van Duyne. Commuted piano synthesis. In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Computer Music Conference, pages 335–342, Banff, Canada, 1995. Available
at http://www-ccrma.stanford.edu/  jos/cs.html.
J. O. Smith III. Digital Waveguide Modeling of Musical Instruments.
http://ccrma.stanford.edu/  jos/pasp/, 2004.
A. Stulov. A hysteretic hammer-string interaction model for physical model synthesis.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 97(4):2577–2585, 1995.
A. Tarczynski and V. Välimäki. Modifying FIR and IIR ﬁlters for processing signals with
lost samples. In Proceedings of the IEEE Nordic Signal Processing Symposium, pages
359–362, Espoo, Finland, September 1996.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 49
T. Tolonen, V. Välimäki, and M. Karjalainen. Evaluation of Modern Sound
Synthesis Methods. Report no. 48. Helsinki University of Technology, De-
partment of Electrical and Communications Engineering, Laboratory of
Acoustics and Audio Signal Processing, TKK, Espoo, 1998. Available at
http://www.acoustics.hut.ﬁ/publications/reports/sound_synth_report.pdf.
Trustees of Dartmouth College. The history of piano pedals, March 2004.
http://www.dartmouth.edu/  music33/Mus33projects/nodes/PianoHistory/pedals.html.
S. A. Van Duyne and J. O. Smith. A simpliﬁed approach to modeling dispersion caused
by stiffness in string and plates. In Proceedings of the International Computer Music
Conference, pages 407–410, Århus, Denmark, September 1994.
S. A. Van Duyne and J. O. Smith. Developments for the commuted piano. In Proceedings
of the International Computer Music Conference, pages 319–326, Banff, Canada, 1995.
Available at http://www-ccrma.stanford.edu/  jos/cs.html.
V. Välimäki, J. Pakarinen, C. Erkut, and M. Karjalainen. Discrete-time modelling of musi-
cal instruments. Reports on Progress in Physics, 69(1):1–78, 2006.
V. Välimäki, H. Penttinen, J. Knif, M. Laurson, and C. Erkut. Sound synthesis of the harp-
sichord using a computationally efﬁcient physical model. EURASIP Journal on Applied
Signal Processing, 7:934–948, 2004.
R. Väänänen. Efﬁcient modeling and simulation of room reverberation.
Master’s thesis, Helsinki University of Technology, 1997. Available at
http://www.acoustics.hut.ﬁ/publications/ﬁles/theses/vaananen_mst.pdf.
R. Väänänen, V. Välimäki, J. Huopaniemi, and M. Karjalainen. Efﬁcient and parametric
reverberator for room acoustics modeling. In Proceedings of the International Computer
Music Conference, pages 200–203, Thessaloniki, Greece, September 1997.
G. Weinreich. Coupled piano strings. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 62(6):
1474–1484, December 1977.
K. Wogram and T. Mori. Is a grand piano always better than an up-
right piano. In 146s ASA Meeting, Austin, Texas, November 2003.
http://www.acoustics.org/press/146th/Wogram.htm.
Appendix A
Recordings
Basics
– The grand piano: Steinway & Sons Mod. C Sn. 559907
– The upright pianos: Yamaha Mod. U3AS Sn. 4558497 and Yamaha Hybrid piano,
Mod. MPX1Z Sn. 5895823
– Place: Espoo Music School, Espoo, Finland
– Dates: February 23, 2005 (Session 1), and August 19, 2005 (Session 2)
Recording equipment

Microphones: AKG C 480 B

Ampliﬁers: Behringer Eurorack MX602A

PC

Sound card: Digigram VXpocket v2

Impulse hammer
Description of the recordings
The recording sessions were both performed in Espoo Music School in the class
Beethoven, which is their biggest rehearsal class. In the ﬁrst recording session, the sounds
of Steinway & Sons grand piano and Yamaha upright piano were recorded whereas in the
second recording session, sound of Yamaha hybrid upright piano was also recorded. In all
cases, the sounds were recorded with two channels. An example of the microphone posi-
tioning is given in Fig. A.1. The ﬁgure is from the second recording session, where the
50
APPENDIX A. RECORDINGS 51
microphones are positioned 32.5 cm away from the strings of the grand piano, and the mi-
crophone corresponding to the left channel is in



angle and the microphone correspond-
ing to the right channel is in



angle. In the case of the upright piano, the microphone
positionings are shown in Fig. A.2. Both microphones are positioned 35 cm away from
the soundboard. In the ﬁrst recording session, the setups were similar, except in the case of
the upright piano, where the microphone corresponding to the left channel was positioned
above the instrument. However, this setup proved to give insufﬁcient results, as the sound
was colored in a different way when listening the channels separately, and the microphone
positions were changed in the second session.
Figure A.1: Microphone positioning in the case of the grand piano in the second recording
session.
Performed Measurements: Recording session 1
1. Soundboard and string responses (Grand piano and upright piano)

Air radiation response: The bridge was hit with the impulse hammer in the
bass, middle and treble range, 3-5 times/position. The recordings were carried
out with and without the sustain pedal. The air radiation response recording is
illustrated in Fig. A.3. The impulse hammer is hit to the bass end of the bridge.
2. Dynamics (Grand piano and uprigth piano)

Selected notes (C1, C4, C7) with four different dynamics: piano (p), mezzoforte
(mf ), forte (f ), forte fortissimo (fff ). Two cases: Long and short playing styles.
3. Pedal (Grand piano and upright piano)
APPENDIX A. RECORDINGS 52
Figure A.2: Microphone positioning in the case of the upright piano in the second recording
session.
Figure A.3: Recording the soundboard response. The bass end of the bridge is hit with the
impulse hammer.

Selected notes (C1, C4, C7) with sustain pedal depressed with four different
dynamics (p, mf, f, fff ).

Selected notes (C1, C4, C7) with half sustain pedal depressed with four different
dynamics (p, mf, f, fff ).
4. Staccato

Grand piano: Selected notes (C1, C4, C7) with staccato with four different
dynamics (p, mf, f, fff ). Three cases: Without, with and with half sustain pedal.
APPENDIX A. RECORDINGS 53

Upright piano: Selected notes (C1, C4, C7) with staccato with four different
dynamics (p, mf, f, fff ). Two cases: Without and with half sustain pedal. In the
case ’fullsustain pedal’,only one dynamic level (fff ) was played.
5. Chords, scales and musical pieces (Grand piano and upright piano)

Chords: C major, E minor, G major and B major. Left hand plays an octave of
the fundamental note and right hand plays the full chord: Octave of the funda-
mental note, third, and quint. Two cases: With and without the sustain pedal.

Chromatic scale through the whole keyboard.

Musical piece: Jean Sibelius: Neilikka, Op. 85 Nr. 2.
6. Hammer (Grand piano and upright piano)

Selected notes (C1, C4, C7) with the corresponding string group damped with
four different dymanics (p, mf, f, fff ).
7. Dispersion (Grand piano and upright piano)

All notes played with one dynamic level (mf ).
8. Special cases (Grand piano) (Fogwall, 2004)

Damper effect: The sustain pedal was depressed, after that a loud chord was
played, the chord was released, but the pedal was held down.

While the sustain pedal was held down, the chord was silently pressed down.
After a while the pedal was released, but the chord was still held down.

Loud chords were played and immediately after releasing the keys, the sustain
pedal was depressed.

Sympathetic resonance: An up-down scale was played while holding the sustain
pedal down.

String resonance: A chord was layed down without the hammer touching the
strings and some keys were pressed and released.
Performed Measurements: Recording session 2
1. Pedal, Part I

(Grand piano and upright piano) Selected notes (C1, C4, C7) played with four
different dynamics (p, mf, f, fff ) with and without the sustain pedal.
APPENDIX A. RECORDINGS 54

(Grand piano) Selected notes (A0, D1, G1, C2, F2, B2, ES2, AS2, CIS4, F4,
H4, E5, A5, D6, GIS6, C7, F7, H7) played with and without the sustain pedal.
2. Pedal, Part II: Special Cases

(Grand piano and upright piano) Selected notes (C and G from every octave)
played while the sustain pedal was depressed and the string group correspond-
ing to the key was damped.

(Grand piano) Selected notes (G2, E3, C4, G5, E6) played in three different
cases: Simulated sustain pedal with 12 lowest keys silently depressed, without
the sustain pedal and with the sustain pedal.

(Grand piano) Selected notes (G2, E3, C4, E5, E6) played with long and short
playing style when three nearest neighbor from the both sides were silently
pressed down.

(Grand piano) Selected notes (C3, C4, C5) played when all other C-notes were
silently depressed.

(Grand piano and upright piano) Selected notes (C and G from every octave)
played while the sustain pedal was depressed and the string group correspond-
ing to the key was damped right after the key was depressed.

(Grand piano) The string response was recorded while pressing the sustain pedal
down quietly and heavily.
3. Pedal, Part III: Chords and Scales

(Grand piano) Selected chords (C-major, E-minor, G-major and B-minor) were
played with and without the sustain pedal in bass, middle and treble range of
the piano.

(Grand piano) Chromatic scale through the whole keyboard.
4. Staccato

(Grand piano) Selected notes (C1, C4, C7) with staccato with four different
dynamics (p, mf, f, fff ). The sustain pedal was not employed.
5. Hammer

(Grand piano) Selected notes (C1, C4, C7) with the corresponding string group
damped with four different dymanics (p, mf, f, fff ).
APPENDIX A. RECORDINGS 55

(Grand piano) Air radiation response: The bridge was hit with the impulse ham-
mer in the bass, middle and treble range, 3-5 times/position. The recordings
were carried out with and without the sustain pedal.